[PAGE 1]
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY 
O FFICE OF THE CHIEF OF NA VAL OPERATIONS 
2000 NAVY PENTAGON 
W ASHINGTON, DC 20350-2000 
OPNA V INSTRUCTION 5354, 1J 
From: Chief of Naval Operations 
OPNAVINST 5354,IJ 
Nl 
5 Jun 2025 
Subj: NAVY HARASSMENT PREVENTION AND MILITARY EQUAL OPPORTUNITY 
PROGRAM 
Ref: 
See appendix A 
l, Purpose 
a, To issue policies and standards to aid in the prevention of and response to, harassment 
and prohibited discrimination throughout the Navy, define requirements and assign responsibility 
for implementation of the Navy's Harassment Prevention and Military Equal Opportunity 
(MEO) Program per references (a) through (n). 
b. This is an expedited revision to ensure compliance with Executive Orders released by the 
President of the United States. A summary of changes to this instruction are outlined in 
subparagraphs 1 b(l) and 1 b(2). 
(1) Aligns with Executive Order 14151, Ending Radical and Wasteful Government DEi 
Programs and Preferencing. 
(2) Removes gender identity as a basis for prohibited discrimination and discriminatory 
harassment complaints. 
c. The policies in paragraphs lc(l) through lc(4) are still effective. 
(1) Secretary of the Navy Policy Statement of June 24, 2022, Department of the Navy No 
Wrong Door Policy. 
(2) NA V AD MIN 022/24, Implementation of Confidential Reporting Option for Sexual 
Harassment. 
(3) Secretary of the Navy Memorandum of July 17, 2024, Misconduct Report Incident 
Tracker Policy. 
(4) ALNAV 001/25, Policy Governing Investigation and Handling of Formal Sexual 
Harassment Complaints Starting January I, 2025, Under 10 U.S.C. 
2. Cancellation. OPNAVINST 5354. lH. 


[PAGE 2]
3. Scope and Applicability 
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
a. This instruction applies to all active-duty Navy personnel, both active and reserve 
components; cadets and midshipmen of the United States Naval Academy and the Naval Reserve 
Officers Training Corps; Navy Reserve personnel when performing active or inactive duty for 
training or engaging in any activity directly related to the perfonnance of a Department of 
Defense (DoD) Reserve duty or function; and members of other Services when assigned or 
attached to a Navy unit. 
b. Civilian employees who raise allegations of harassment or prohibited discrimination must 
be referred to the appropriate servicing Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) office. 
4. Records Management 
a. Records created as a result of this instruction, regardless of format or media, must be 
maintained and dispositioned per the records disposition schedules found on Directives and 
Records Management Division portal page at 
https://portal.secnav.navy.mil/orgs/DUSNM/DONAA/DRM/Records-and-lnfonnation-
Management/ Approved%20Record%20Schedules/Fonns/ Allltems.aspx. 
b. For questions concerning the management of records related to this instruction or the 
records disposition schedules, please contact the local records manager or the OPNA V Records 
Management Program (DNS-16). 
5. Review and Effective Date. Per OPNA VIN ST 5215.17 A, the Office of the Chief of Naval 
Operations, Navy Culture and Force Resilience Office (OPNA V N 17), will review this 
instruction rumually of its issuance date to ensure applicability, currency, and consistency with 
Federal, DoD, Secretary of the Navy and Navy policy and statutory authority using OPNA V 
5215/40 Review of Instruction. This instruction will be in effect for 10 years, unless revised or 
cancelled in the interim and will be reissued by the 10-year anniversary date if it is still required, 
unless it meets one of the exceptions in OPNAVINST 5215.17 A, paragraph 9. Otherwise, if the 
instruction is no longer required, it will be processed for cancellation as soon as the need for 
cancellation is known following the guidance in OPNAV Manual 5215.1 of May 2016. 
6. Forms or Infonnation Management Control 
a. Forms. The forms listed in subparagraphs 6a(l) through 6a(4) may be obtained from 
Navy Fonns Online website at: https://forms.documentservices.dla.mil/order/. 
(1) NA VPERS 5354/2 Navy Equal Opportunity (EO) and Sexual Harassment Report. 
(2) NAVPERS 1626/7 Report and Disposition of Offense(s). 
2 


[PAGE 3]
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(3) OPNA V 5354/3 Command Climate Specialist Formal Harassment or Unlawful 
Discrimination Report Sufficiency Review. 
(4) OPNAV 5354/4 Command Climate Specialist Formal Harassment or Unlawful 
Discrimination Report Higher Level Review. 
(5) NA VPERS 15600E Equal Opportunity Information Poster, stock number 0500-LP-
117-64 71, is available through the Navy Logistics Library website at: 
https://nll.navsup.navy.mil/default.cfm. 
b. Information Management Control. The data collection contained within this instruction 
are exempt from control symbols per SECNAV M-5214.1 of December 2005, part IV, 
subparagraphs 7g and 7n. 
Releasability and distribution: 
~ 
J. CHEESEMAN, JR 
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations 
(Personnel, Manpower, and Training) 
This instruction is cleared for public release and is available electronically only via Department 
of the Navy Issuances website, https://www.secnav.navy.mil/doni/default.aspx. 
3 


[PAGE 4]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Chapter I 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
I. Purpose 
1-1 
2. Policy 
1-1 
3. Effective Communication in the Workplace 
1-3 
Chapter 2 
DESTRUCTIVE BEHAVIORS COVERED BY THIS INSTRUCTION 
I. Harassment 
2-1 
2. Prohibited Discrimination 
2-6 
3. Wrongful Broadcast or Distribution oflntimate Visual Images 
2-6 
Chapter 3 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
I. Deputy ChiefofNaval Operations (Personnel, Manpower, and Training) 
3-1 
2. Navy Harassment Prevention and Military Equal Opportunity Office 
3-1 
(OPNAV NI 70C) 
3. Naval Inspector General and Echelon 2 Inspectors General 
3-3 
4. NETC 
3-3 
5. Commander, Commanding Officer, Officer in Charge and Civilian Equivalents 
3-4 
6. Command Resilience Team 
3-7 
7. Command Climate Specialist 
3-8 
8. Command Managed Equal Opportunity Program Manager 
3-10 
9. Service Member 
3-12 
Chapter4 
PROCEDURES FOR SUBMITTING, HANDLING AND RESOLVING 
INFORMAL HARASSMENT AND PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATION 
COMPLAINTS 
1. General Guidelines 
4-1 
2. Complainant Responsibilities 
4-1 
3. Conunand Responsibility 
4-2 
Figure 4-1: Informal Complaint Process Flow Chart 
4-3 
Chapter 5 
PROCEDURES FOR SUBMITTING, HANDLING, APPEALING AND 
REPORTING FORMAL AND ANONYMOUS HARASSMENT AND 
PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATION COMPLAINTS 
I. General Procedures 
2. Complaint Processing 
3. Complainant Responsibilities 
4. Anonymous Complaints 
5. Command Responsibility 
6. Appeal Process 
7. Appeal Compliance Review 
5-1 
5-1 
5-3 
5-4 
5-5 
5-11 
5-12 


[PAGE 5]
Figure 5-1: Formal Complaint Process Flow Chart 
Chapter 6 
RETALIATION RESPONSE PROCEDURES 
1. Purpose 
2. Discussion 
3. Procedures 
Chapter 7 
TRAINING 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
5-13 
6-1 
6-1 
6-1 
I. Common Training Requirements 
7-1 
2. Orientation Training 
7-1 
3. Common Military Training 
7-1 
4. Professional Military Education and Leadership Development Training 
7-1 
5. Harassment Prevention and MEO Training at Pre-Commissioning Programs 
7-2 
6. CMEO Program Manager Training 
7-3 
7. Sustaimnent Training 
7-3 
8. Annual CCS Training 
7-3 
9. Leadership Training Awareness Seminar (LT AS) 
7-3 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A 
-
References 
A-1 
Appendix B 
-
Definitions 
C-1 
Appendix C 
-
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
D-1 
Appendix D 
-
Data Collection Requirements 
E-1 
Appendix E 
-
Command Managed Equal Opportunity Program Manager 
F-1 
Designation Letter 
Appendix F 
-
Command Climate Specialist Checklist 
G-1 
Appendix G 
-
Command Managed Equal Opportunity Program Checklist 
H-1 
Appendix H 
-
Command Climate Assessment Process 
I-1 
Appendix I 
-
Equal Opportunity Annual Climate Assessment 
J-1 
Appendix J 
-
Military Equal Opportunity Resources 
K-1 
Appendix K 
-
Command Resilience Team Non-Disclosure Document 
L-1 
Appendix L 
-
Informal Resolution System 
M-1 
Appendix M -
Harassment or Prohibited Discrimination Complaint Retaliation 
N-1 
Awareness 
11 


[PAGE 6]
CHAPTER I 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
I. Purpose. To implement references (a) through (n) that direct DON policy on harassment 
prevention and Military Equal Opportunity including sexual harassment, discriminatory 
harassment, hazing, bullying and stalking, hereafter referred to as harassment, prohibited 
discrimination and wrongful broadcast or distribution of intimate visual images, provide 
guidance on administering command climate assessments, implement retaliation prevention and 
response procedures, implement primary prevention and response procedures and assign related 
responsibilities. Commanders, commanding officers, officers in charge and civilian equivalents 
(hereafter referred to as Commanders) must take action and be held accountable for 
implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this instruction. Interpretation of this 
instruction must be governed by the definitions in appendix B. The abbreviations and acronyms 
used throughout this instruction are outlined in appendix C. 
2. Policy 
a. The Navy is comprised of men and women who work together to accomplish the mission. 
Each member of the Navy is entitled to be treated with dignity and respect and to work in an 
environment free of harassment and prohibited discrimination. Additionally, each member is 
expected to abide by the Navy core values of honor, courage and commihnent. An effective 
MEO program is critical to fostering a positive command climate, organizational effectiveness 
and military readiness. Harassment and prohibited discrimination are fundamentally at odds 
with the obligation of Service Members to treat others with dignity and respect and must never 
be ignored or condoned. 
b. The chain of command is the primary and preferred channel for identifying and 
correcting destructive behaviors. This includes the processing and resolving of harassment and 
prohibited discrimination complaints and ensuring that human relations and MEO matters are 
taken seriously and acted upon as necessary. The chain of command is responsible for creating 
and maintaining an environment that incorporates the policies set out in this instruction. 
Leadership will strive to create a climate in which persons feel free to raise concerns about 
harassment or prohibited discrimination and are confident that those concerns will be addressed 
with safeguards against retaliation. 
c. The objective of the Navy's MEO program is to promote an environment free from 
personal, social or institutional barriers that prevent Service Members from rising to the highest 
level of responsibility possible. Commanders are responsible for ensuring MEO for all assigned 
personnel. The command managed equal opportunity (CMEO) program is one of many of the 
commander's tools for the prevention of unprofessional behavior and for ensuring MEO goals 
are obtained. Leadership has the authority and responsibility to ensure that the Navy Core 
Values are integrated into our daily business. Service Members must be evaluated only on 
individual merit, fitness, capability and perfonnance. 
1-1 


[PAGE 7]
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
d. As stated in references (b) and (c), it is DoD policy and, as stated in references (d) and 
(e), it is DON policy to prohibit harassment and prohibited discrimination. This applies to, but is 
not limited to, recruitment, recruitment advertising, training, advancement and promotion, job 
assignments, collateral duties, transfers and all other aspects of employment. The Navy is 
committed to maintaining a work environment that is free of harassment and prohibited 
discrimination. 
e. The Navy has zero tolerance for harassment and prohibited discrimination. Acts of 
harassment and prohibited discrimination are contrary to the Navy's Core Values of Honor, 
Courage and Commitment. Service Members who model the Navy's Core Values do not engage 
in demeaning or destructive behaviors nor condone these actions in others. Incidents of 
harassment and prohibited discrimination cover a wide range of behaviors and can be subtle or 
overt. The full range of administrative and punitive disciplinary actions is available to address 
substantiated harassment or prohibited discrimination allegations. These include, but are not 
limited to, informal counseling, formal counseling, comments in fitness reports and evaluations, 
non-judicial punishment, courts-martial and administrative separation. This instruction and the 
prohibition of harassment and prohibited discrimination are considered lawful general orders 
effective without further implementation. A violation of these provisions by military personnel 
who engage in any of the destructive behaviors enumerated in chapter 2 of this instruction may 
be punishable as stated in reference (f). 
(1) In line with reference (e), military personnel of the Navy must be processed for 
administrative separation following a substantiated incident of sexual harassment involving any 
of the circumstances listed in subparagraphs 2e(l)(a) and 2e(l)(b). For the purpose of this 
subparagraph, an incident is substantiated either if there has been a court-martial conviction or if 
the commander detennines that sexual harassment has occurred. 
(a) Action, threats or attempts to influence another's career or job in exchange for 
sexual favors or rewards in exchange for sexual favors. 
(b) Physical contact of a sexual nature which, if charged as a violation of reference 
(g), could result in punitive discharge. 
(2) Commanders are not precluded from initiating administrative separation proceedings 
for reasons set forth in the appropriate service regulations for individuals whose conduct, not 
covered in subparagraphs 2e(l)(a) and 2e(l)(b), warrants separation. 
f. 
Prevention is the best tool to eliminate harassment and prohibited discrimination. 
Commanders and supervisors at every level must clearly communicate that harassment and 
prohibited discrimination will not be tolerated and must reinforce, through both words and 
actions, a climate that does not condone this behavior. 
1-2 


[PAGE 8]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
g. Any Service Member who believes they have been subjected to harassment or prohibited 
discrimination is encouraged to seek resolution. The Service Member should contact the 
command climate specialist (CCS) or CMEO program manager to determine available resolution 
options. Policy guidance or assistance is also available by contacting the Navy Harassment and 
MEO Advice Line at (800) 253-0931 or MILL_Navy_EO_Advice@us.navy.mil. All complaints 
must be treated sensitively. Feedback will be provided to all affected individuals consistent with 
the requirements of the Privacy Act, Freedom of Infonnation Act and other pertinent laws, 
regulations and negotiated agreements. 
h. Individuals must not: 
(1) Actively participate in criminal gangs and in other organizations that advocate 
supremacist, extremist or criminal gang doctrine, ideology or causes including those that attempt 
to create illegal discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), national 
origin or sexual orientation advocates the use of force or violence against the govennnent of the 
United States, the government of any State, territory, district or possession thereof or the 
govennnent of any subdivision therein or otherwise engages in efforts to deprive individuals of 
their civil rights. 
Note: The term "actively participate" includes acts or conduct performed alone or in 
concert with another, such as demonstrating, rallying, fundraising, recruiting, training, 
organizing or leading such organizations. The term "participate" also includes engaging 
in any other activities in relation to such organizations or in furtherance of the objectives 
of such organizations, when such activities are detrimental to good order, discipline or 
mission accomplishment. Further guidance is provided in reference (g). 
(2) Retaliate, as defined in reference (h) and in this policy, against a person who provides 
information on an incident of alleged harassment or prohibited discrimination. 
(3) Knowingly make a false allegation of harassment or prohibited discrimination. 
(4) Condone or ignore harassment or prohibited discrimination. 
i. 
This instruction and the prohibition against supremacist and extremist activities found in 
reference (i), article 1167, are lawful general orders effective without further implementation. 
3. Effective Communication in the Workplace. The operational language of the Navy is 
English. Navy personnel must maintain sufficient proficiency in English to perform their official 
duties. All operational communications must be understood by everyone who has a need to 
know their content and, therefore, must normally be in English. However, commanders may not 
require Navy personnel to use English unless such use is clearly necessary and proper for the 
performance of military functions. Accordingly, commanders may not require the use of English 
for personal communications that are unrelated to military functions 
1-3 


[PAGE 9]
CHAPTER2 
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
DESTRUCTIVE BEHAVIORS COVERED BY THIS INSTRUCTION 
1. Harassment. Behavior that is unwelcome or offensive to a reasonable person, whether oral, 
written or physical that creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive environment. In line with 
reference (c), harassment may include, but is not limited to, unwanted physical contact, offensive 
jokes, epithets or name-calling, ridicule or mockery, insults or put-downs, displays of offensive 
objects or imagery, non-verbal gestures, stereotyping, intimidating acts, veiled threats of 
violence, threatening or provoking remarks, racial or other slurs, derogatory remarks about a 
person's accent or displays of racially offensive symbols. Types ofharassment include, but are 
not limited to, discriminatory harassment, sexual harassment, hazing, bullying and stalking. 
Harassment can be oral, written or physical. Harassment can occur through electronic 
communications, including social media, other forms of communication and in person. 
Activities or actions undertaken for a proper military or govermnental purpose, such as combat 
survival training, making work assigmnents or conducting performance counseling, are not 
considered harassment. 
a. Discriminatory Harassment. Unwelcome conduct based on race, color, religion, sex 
(including pregnancy), national origin or sexual orientation. Discriminatory harassment occurs 
when the conduct is severe or pervasive enough to create a work enviromnent that a reasonable 
person would consider intimidating, hostile or abusive. Discriminatory harassment can be 
conducted through the use of electronic devices or communications and by other means 
including social media, as well as in person. 
b. Sexual Harassment 
(1) Sexual harassment is conduct that: 
(a) Involves unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and deliberate or 
repeated offensive comments or gestures of a sexual nature when: 
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a tenn or 
condition of a person's job, pay or career. 
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a person is used as a basis for 
career or employment decisions affecting that person. 
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an 
individual's work performance or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive working 
enviromnent. 
(b) Is so severe or pervasive that a reasonable person would perceive, and the victim 
does perceive the enviromnent as hostile or offensive. 
2-1 


[PAGE 10]
OPNAVINST 5354.JJ 
5 Jun 2025 
( 1) Any use or condonation, by any person in a supervisory or command position, 
of any form of sexual behavior to control, influence or affect the career, pay or job of a member 
of the armed forces or a civilian employee of the DoD. 
(2) Any deliberate or repeated unwelcome verbal comment or gestures of a sexual 
nature by any member of the Military Services or civilian employee of the DoD. 
(3) There is no requirement for concrete psychological harm to the complainant 
for behavior to constitute sexual harassment. Behavior is sufficient to constitute sexual 
harassment if it is so severe or pervasive that a reasonable person would perceive, and the 
complainant does perceive the environment as hostile or offensive. 
(4) While it is not possible to list all of those additional circumstances that may 
constitute sexual harassment, subparagraphs 2b(5)(a) through 2b(5)(g) provide some examples of 
conduct, which, if unwelcome, constitutes sexual harassment. 
(a) Sexual epithets or jokes, written or oral references to sexual conduct, comments 
regarding one's own or another person's sex life, sexual activity, experiences, deficiencies or 
prowess or sexually suggestive comments regarding one's own or another person's body. 
(b) The display of inappropriate sexually oriented material (i.e., displaying sexually 
suggestive objects, pictures, cartoons, images on a computer, phone or other electronic device, 
etc.). 
( c) Leering, whistling, sexual gestures, suggestive or insulting comments, threats or 
innuendos of a sexual nature. The person observing such behavior need not be the object of such 
conduct for this to constitute sexual harassment. 
(d) Physical contact such as touching, hugging, brushing against a person's body, 
impeding or blocking movements. Depending on the circumstances, any unwanted physical 
contact could elevate the offense. 
(e) Persistent requests for dates, inappropriate letters, telephone calls, messages via 
social media applications or messaging platfonns, e-mail, text messages, graphics and other 
communications or gifts. 
(f) Direct or implied threats that indicate that submission to sexual advances will be a 
condition of employment, work status, promotion, grades or letters of recommendation. 
(g) Sexually explicit statements, questions, jokes or anecdotes regardless of the 
means of communication (oral, written, e-mail, text messages, social media, etc.). 
2-2 


[PAGE 11]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
c. Hazing. A form of harassment that includes conduct through which Service members or 
DoD employees, without a proper military or other governmental purpose but with a nexus to 
military service, physically or psychologically injure or create a risk of physical or psychological 
injury to Service members for the purpose of: initiation into, admission into, affiliation with, 
change in status or position within or continued membership in any military or DoD civilian 
organization. Hazing can be conducted through the use of electronic devices or communications 
and by other means including social media, as well as in person. 
(I) Hazing is evaluated by a reasonable person standard and includes, but is not limited 
to, the behaviors listed in subparagraphs lc(l)(a) through lc(l)(i) when performed without a 
proper military or other governmental purpose. 
(a) Any form of initiation or congratulatory act that involves physically striking 
another person in any manner or threatening to do the same. 
(b) Pressing any object into another person's skin, regardless of whether it pierces the 
skin, such as "pinning" or "tacking on" of rank insignia, aviator wings, jump wings, diver 
insignia, badges, medals or any other object. 
( c) Oral or written berating of another person with the purpose of belittling or 
humiliating. 
( d) Encouraging another person to engage in illegal, harmful, demeaning or 
dangerous acts. 
( e) Playing abusive or malicious tricks. 
( f) Branding, handcuffing, duct taping, tattooing, shaving, greasing or painting 
another person. 
(g) Subjecting another person to excessive or abusive use of water. 
(h) Forcing another person to consume food, alcohol, drugs or any other substance. 
(i) Soliciting, coercing or knowingly permitting another person to solicit or coerce 
acts of hazing. 
(2) Hazing does not include properly directed command or organizational activities that 
serve a proper military or other governmental purpose, or the requisite training activities required 
to prepare for such activities (i.e. administrative corrective measures, extra military instruction or 
command-authorized physical training). 
2-3 


[PAGE 12]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(3) Service members may be responsible for an act of hazing even if there was actual or 
implied consent from the victim and regardless of the grade or rank, status or service of the 
victim. 
( 4) Hazing is prohibited in all circumstances and environments including off-duty or 
"unofficial" unit functions and settings. 
d. Bullying. A form of harassment that includes acts of aggression by Service members or 
DoD civilian employees, with a nexus to military service, with the intent of harming a Service 
member either physically or psychologically, without a proper military or other governmental 
purpose. Bullying may involve the singling out of an individual from his or her coworkers or 
unit, for ridicule because he or she is considered different or weak. It often involves an 
imbalance of power between the aggressor and the victim. Bullying can be conducted through 
the use of electronic devices or communications and by other means including social media, as 
well as in person. 
(1) Bullying is evaluated by a reasonable person standard and includes but is not limited 
to the behaviors listed in subparagraphs ld(l)(a) through ld(l)(j) when performed without a 
proper military or other governmental purpose. 
(a) Physically striking another person in any manner or threatening to do the same. 
(b) Intimidating, teasing or taunting another person. 
( c) Oral or written berating of another person with the purpose of belittling or 
humiliating. 
( d) Encouraging another person to engage in illegal, harmful, demeaning or 
dangerous acts. 
( e) Playing abusive or malicious tricks. 
(f) Branding, handcuffing, duct taping, tattooing, shaving, greasing or painting 
another person. 
(g) Subjecting another person to excessive or abusive use of water. 
(h) Forcing another person to consume food, alcohol, drugs or any other substance. 
(i) Degrading or damaging another's property or reputation. 
(j) Soliciting, coercing or knowingly permitting another person to solicit or coerce 
acts of bullying. 
2-4 


[PAGE 13]
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(2) Bullying does not include properly directed command or organizational activities that 
serve a proper military or other governmental purpose, or the requisite training activities required 
to prepare for such activities (i.e., command-authorized physical training). 
(3) Service members may be responsible for an act of bullying even ifthere was actual or 
implied consent from the victim and regardless of the grade or rank, status or service of the 
victim. 
(4) Bullying is prohibited in all circumstances and enviromnents, including off-duty or 
"unofficial" unit functions and settings. 
e. Stalking. Conduct that is: 
(1) A wrongful course of conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a 
reasonable person to fear death or bodily harm, including sexual assault, to himself or herself, to 
a member of his or her immediate family or to his or her intimate partner. 
(2) Carried out by someone who has knowledge or should have knowledge, that the 
specific person will be placed in reasonable fear of death or bodily harm, including sexual 
assault, to himself or herself, to a member of his or her immediate family or to his or her intimate 
partner; and 
(3) When the conduct induces reasonable fear in the specific person of death or bodily 
harm, including sexual assault, to himself or herself, to a member of his or her immediate family 
or to his or her intimate partner. 
(4) Subparagraphs le(4)(a) through le(4)(e) define tenns utilized in subparagraph le of 
this chapter. 
(a) Conduct. Means conduct of any kind, including use of surveillance, the mails, an 
interactive computer service, an electronic communication service or an electronic 
communication system. 
(b) Course of Conduct. A repeated maintenance of visual or physical proximity to a 
specific person; a repeated conveyance of verbal threat, written threats or threats implied by 
conduct or a combination of such threats, directed at or toward a specific person; or a pattern of 
conduct composed of repeated acts evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
( c) Repeated. With respect to conduct, means two or more occasions of such 
conduct. 
2-5 


[PAGE 14]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
( d) Immediate Family. In the case of a specific person, means that person's spouse, 
parent, brother or sister, child or other person to whom he or she stands in loco parentis; or any 
other person living in his or her household and related to him or her by blood or marriage. 
(e) Intimate Partner. In the case ofa specific person, means a former spouse of the 
specific person, a person who shares a child in common with the specific person or a person who 
cohabits with or has cohabited as a spouse with the specific person; or a person who has been in 
a social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the specific person, as determined by 
the length of the relationship, the type ofrelationship and the frequency of interaction between 
the persons involved in the relationship. 
( 5) Stalking must be reported to the appropriate Military Criminal Investigative 
Organization. 
2. Prohibited Discrimination. Discrimination, including disparate treatment, of an individual or 
group on the basis ofrace, color, national origin, religion, sex (including pregnancy), or sexual 
orientation that is not otherwise authorized by law or regulation and detracts from military 
readiness. 
3. Wrongful Broadcast or Distribution oflntimate Visual Images. Service members that 
perpetrate the actions outlined in subparagraphs 3a through 3d are guilty of wrongful distribution 
of intimate visual images or visual images of sexually explicit conduct. 
a. Who knowingly and wrongfully broadcasts or distributes an intimate visual image of 
another person or a visual image of sexually explicit conduct involving a person who: 
(I) Is at least 18 years of age at the time the intimate visual image or visual image of 
sexually explicit conduct was created. 
(2) Is identifiable from the intimate visual image or visual image of sexually explicit 
conduct itself or from information displayed in connection with the intimate visual image or 
visual image of sexually explicit conduct. 
(3) Does not explicitly consent to the broadcast or distribution of the intimate visual 
image or visual image of sexually explicit conduct. 
b. Who knows or reasonably should have known that the intimate visual image or visual 
image of sexually explicit conduct was made under circumstances in which the person depicted 
in the intimate visual image or visual image of sexually explicit conduct retained a reasonable 
expectation of privacy regarding any broadcast or distribution of the intimate visual image or 
visual image of sexually explicit conduct. 
2-6 


[PAGE 15]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
c. Who knows or reasonably should have known that the broadcast or distribution of the 
intimate visual image or visual image of sexually explicit conduct is likely: 
(I) To cause hann, harassment, intimidation, emotional distress or financial loss for the 
person depicted in the intimate visual image or visual image of sexually explicit conduct; or 
(2) To harm substantially the depicted person with respect to that person's health, safety, 
business, calling, career, financial condition, reputation or personal relationships. 
d. Whose conduct, under the circumstances, had a reasonably direct and palpable 
connection to a military mission or military enviromnent. 
e. Subparagraphs 3e(l) through 3e(7) define terms utilized in paragraph 3 of this chapter. 
(1) Broadcast. Electronically transmit a visual image with the intent that it be viewed by 
a person or persons. 
(2) Distribute. To deliver to the actual or constructive possession of another person, 
including transmission by mail or electronic means. 
(3) Intimate Visual Image. A visual image that depicts a private area of a person. 
( 4) Private Area. The naked or underwear-clad genitalia, anus, buttocks or female areola 
or nipple. 
(5) Reasonable Expectation of Privacy. Circumstances in which a reasonable person 
would believe that a private area of the person or sexually explicit conduct involving the person, 
would not be visible to the public. 
(6) Sexually Explicit Conduct. Actual or simulated genital-genital contact oral-genital 
contact, anal-genital contact or oral-anal contact, whether between persons of the same or 
opposite sex, bestiality, masturbation or sadistic or masochistic abuse. 
(7) Visual Image. As defined in subparagraphs 3e(7)(a) through 3e(7)(c). 
(a) Any developed or undeveloped photograph, picture, film or video. 
(b) Any digital or computer image, picture, film or video made by any means, 
including those transmitted by any means, including streaming media, even if not stored in a 
permanent fonnat. 
(c) Any digital or electronic data capable of conversion into a visual image. 
2-7 


[PAGE 16]
CHAPTER3 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
1. Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Personnel, Manpower, and Training) (CNO Nl) 
a. Ensure leaders at all levels are held appropriately accountable for fostering a climate free 
from harassment and prohibited discrimination and does not tolerate retaliation for reporting 
harassment or prohibited discrimination allegations. 
b. Establish and maintain a robust harassment prevention and MEO program by maintaining 
sufficient full-time staff positions and allocating sufficient resources to provide oversight. 
c. Report Navy wide climate assessment results to the Fleet. 
d. Ensure that all military personnel, including command selectees, flag officers and Senior 
Executive Service (SES) officials, receive adequate training in MEO, primary prevention, human 
relations and the command climate assessment on a recurring basis and at all levels of 
professional military education. 
e. Ensure that all personnel may participate equally in all occupational areas and warfare 
specialties within legal bounds. 
f. 
Ensure leadership opportunities and an equitable assignment process exists for all 
personnel. 
g. Ensure Equal Opportunity (EO) for promotion and advancement exists for all personnel. 
h. Delegate exception to policy approval authority to OPNAV NI 7, as appropriate. 
2. OPNAV NI 70C 
a. Monitor the Navy's progress toward accomplishing MEO goals and a positive command 
climate as directed by references (b) through (e). 
b. Develop and implement standards for holding leaders accountable for promoting, 
supporting and enforcing MEO policies, plans and programs. 
c. Develop results oriented performance measures to assess effectiveness and impacts of 
MEO policies and programs. 
d. Provide reports via appropriate channels as required to the Office of Civil Rights and 
Equal Opportunity Policy at the Office of the Secretary of Defense. 
3-1 


[PAGE 17]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
e. Annually provide an EO climate assessment to the OPNA V NI 7 using the data collected 
from Naval Inspector General (NAVINSGEN), fleet commanders and echelon 2 commands. 
f. 
Use the annual EO climate assessment results to gauge the effectiveness and impact of 
MEO initiatives. 
g. Provide overall direction, guidance, support and advice for the management of command 
climates assessments. 
h. Provide overall direction, guidance, support and oversight to CCSs and CMEO program 
managers. 
i. 
Serve as Program Manager and Community Advisor for CCSs, Navy enlisted 
classification code 809 A. 
j. Recognize the unique characteristics of the reserve component when establishing 
programs and procedures for processing harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints 
involving Selected Reserve (SELRES) personnel. 
k. Maintain an official toll-free Navy harassment and MEO advice line. Ensure any 
personnel responding to inquiries are fully trained to address situations involving members of the 
reserve component in addition to active duty personnel. 
I. 
Coordinate with the Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute (DEOMI) to 
develop and maintain Navy service specific training. 
m. Coordinate with Naval Education and Training Command (NETC) to develop and 
maintain CMEO program manager training. 
n. Conduct a Navy MEO brief to Navy service specific classes at the DEOMI to answer 
concerns and questions and inform students of programmatic updates as well as systemic MEO 
trends, issues and best practices within the Navy. 
o. Conduct annual face-to-face CCS training. This summit must be used to reinforce this 
instruction, provide programmatic and instruction updates, share best practices and leverage data 
analytics to illustrate trends, programmatic impacts and data driven recommendations. While the 
preferred delivery method is face-to-face, this training may be conducted virtually as needed. 
p. Maintain an official Navy MEO website. 
3. NAVINSGEN and echelon 2 Inspectors General (IG) 
3-2 


[PAGE 18]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
a. NA VINSGEN provides a summary of allegations against flag officers or SES officials 
relating to harassment and prohibited discrimination by 15 December annually to OPNA V 
N 170C via Flag Matters (N00F). Summary must include the total number of complaints and the 
data requirements outlined in appendix D for each complaint. NA VINSGEN is the investigative 
authority for all harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints against flag officers and 
SES officials except those under investigation by the DoD IG. 
b. Provide a summary of hotline allegations involving harassment and prohibited 
discrimination by 15 December annually to OPNA V NI 70C. Summary must include the total 
number of complaints and the data requirements outlined in appendix D for each complaint. 
c. Include specific assessments of MEO programs in all command inspections and area 
visits and ensure that subordinate IGs include MEO program assessments in their own unit-level 
inspection programs. Provide copies of all MEO program findings, to include specific MEO 
questions or issues, the unique insights of local CCSs, CMEO program managers and others 
regarding MEO program performance and the concerns of individual Sailors, to OPNAV NI 70C 
quarterly. 
4. NETC 
a. Function as Navy MEO training manager and developer of overall Navy training 
strategies from entry through executive levels in coordination with OPNA V NI 70C and DEOMI, 
when applicable. 
b. Develop, conduct and maintain formal CMEO program manager training (approved by 
OPNAV NI 70C) for CMEO program manager students. 
c. Ensure that all MEO training is up-to-date with current policy. Training must include 
instructions on understanding accountability and complaint processing responsibility, infonnal 
and formal resolution options, characteristics and prevention of harassment and prohibited 
discrimination and the relationship between leadership and a professional command climate. 
d. Ensure Common Military Training (CMT) is current with policy. 
e. Ensure MEO training at Navy Leadership and Ethics Center and the Senior Enlisted 
Academy includes the infonnation contained in subparagraphs 4e(l) through 4e(6). 
(I) The relationship between leadership and a professional command climate. 
(2) Instruction in understanding accountability and responsibility and harassment and 
prohibited discrimination prevention strategies. 
3-3 


[PAGE 19]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(3) The commander's role with the Command Resilience Team (CRT) and the command 
climate assessment. 
( 4) The role of the CCS and CMEO program manager. 
(5) The methods for filing complaints, what must occur when a complaint is filed, an 
explanation of the complaint timelines and other external methods to seek redress. 
(6) The harassment and prohibited discrimination investigation process and potential 
disciplinary actions based on substantiated allegations. 
f. 
Ensure all applicable training meets the terminal learning objectives outlined in reference 
(b) and requirements outlined in reference (c). 
5. Commander, Commanding Officer, Officer in Charge and Civilian Equivalents 
a. Within 60 days of assuming command and along with the deputy, executive officer (XO) 
or assistant officer in charge and senior enlisted leader, obtain an MEO and command climate 
brief from their CRT. 
b. Promote a positive command climate. 
c. All echelon 2 commands and echelon 3 commands that have subordinate commands, 
must establish a CCS billet to provide enhanced oversight of their command and subordinate 
command's harassment prevention and MEO programs and command climates. The type of 
commander CCS will retain administrative responsibility for tracking and continuity of ships 
deployed with the carrier strike group or amphibious readiness group. 
Note: Aircraft carriers must have two CCS billets and at least one of the CCSs 
assigned should be an E-7 or above. CCSs assigned to aircraft carriers and amphibious 
assault ships must be used as the carrier strike group or amphibious readiness group 
subject matter expert on all matters relating to harassment prevention and MEO and 
command climate while the strike group or amphibious readiness group commander is 
embarked. 
d. Ensure members assigned as CMEO program managers complete the CMEO manager 
course prior to appointment (unless they previously completed the course). The CMEO program 
manager assignment must not create a conflict of interest with other duty assigmnents (i.e. 
member of the command triad, CCS, legal officer, etc.). The CMEO program manager must 
have a designation letter signed by the commander, sample letter provided in appendix E. 
Note: All commands must be staffed with a minimum of one CMEO program 
manager. The CMEO program manager must be an E-6 or above with at least 24 months 
3-4 


[PAGE 20]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
remaining in the command at the time of assigmnent. CMEO program managers must 
serve in this position for a minimum of 24 months. Any deviations from this instruction 
for assigmnent of a CMEO program manager need to be approved, in writing, by the 
Immediate Superior in Command (!SIC). 
e. Develop, disseminate and enforce harassment prevention and MEO policy statement(s) 
which must include expectations regarding EO and procedural compliance. 
f. 
Ensure that a comprehensive visual inspection throughout the command is conducted on 
a regular basis, not less than annually to ensure all workplaces and common access spaces are 
free from materials that create a degrading, hostile or offensive work enviromnent. Document 
completion on a Memorandum for the Record (MFR) and maintain in the command continuity 
folder. 
g. Monitor their command and subordinate command's command climates. 
h. Ensure the command's harassment prevention and MEO program complies with all items 
cited in appendices G and H, as applicable. 
1. 
Assist subordinate commands as necessary in their implementation of this instruction. 
j. Ensure assessments and inspections of subordinate commands' CCS and CMEO 
programs are being conducted every 2years using appendices G and H, as applicable. Echelon 2 
commanders report compliance to OPNAV NI 70C quarterly. 
k. Ensure establishment of a CRT. 
I. 
Complete and ensure subordinate commanders complete, a command climate assessment 
within 120 days after assumption of command and annually as follow-up assessments during 
their command tenure. A minimum of one climate assessment must be completed each fiscal 
year. The command climate assessment process is outlined in appendix H. Echelon 2 
commanders report command climate assessment compliance to OPNA V Nl 70C quarterly. 
Note: Commands must include attached civilian personnel in the administration of 
the command climate assessment ( contractors and local foreign nationals are not 
authorized to take the survey). Supported commands must include their SELRES 
personnel in the administration of their command climate assessment. SELRES 
personnel attached to voluntary training units and operational support units will be 
included in the Navy Operational Support Center (NAVOPSPTCEN) command climate 
assessment. All SELRES attached to a commissioned unit must participate in the 
command climate assessment with their supported command. 
3-5 


[PAGE 21]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
m. Include a statement in the commander's perfonnance evaluation or annual fitness report 
annotating if the commander has conducted the required command climate assessment. Failure 
of a commander to conduct the required command climate assessment must be noted in the 
commander's performance evaluation or annual fitness report. 
n. Ensure demographics for command-appointed collateral duty assignments, retention, 
discipline, advancement and awards are reviewed semi-annually by race, ethnicity, sex, paygrade 
and rank. This data is available within the command (i.e., legal and administrative offices). 
Command demographics must be reviewed by the CRT and maintained in the command 
continuity folder for 3 years. Demographic data is available from the Fleet Management and 
Planning System. 
Note: The maintenance and frequent review of statistical data relating to personnel 
can alert commanders to the development of trends, and patterns that may affect the 
command's climate. 
o. Ensure the anonymity and confidentiality ofresponses to interviews, focus groups, 
surveys, etc., in support of an assessment. However, this does not extend to comments that are in 
violation ofreference (f). Personnel in the command triad must not facilitate focus groups or 
interviews during the command climate assessment process. 
p. Maintain a copy of all subordinate command executive summaries for 3 years. 
q. Submit by 15 November annually, an annual climate assessment using appendix I. 
Echelon 2 commands must submit to OPNA V Nl 70C, echelon 3 commands must submit to their 
respective echelon 2 command and echelon 4 and lower commands must submit to their 
respective echelon 3 command or ISIC. The annual climate assessment will reflect the command 
climate assessments of all commands within the enterprise. 
r. Ensure DON procedures for processing harassment and prohibited discrimination 
complaints are prominently displayed. NA VPERS l 5600E Equal Opportunity Infonnation 
Poster, stock number 0500-LP-117-6471, must be displayed and include the name and telephone 
number of the command's points of contact (CCS, CMEO program manager and the appropriate 
servicing EEO office) for EO issues. See appendix J for additional details. 
s. Ensure all individuals are familiar with their right to submit an informal, formal or 
anonymous harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint and the methods for submission. 
t. 
Ensure personnel are aware of the policies and procedures for filing a report of retaliation 
in line with reference (h). 
u. Promote the chain of command as the primary and preferred channel to identify, process 
and resolve complaints of harassment and prohibited discrimination. 
3-6 


[PAGE 22]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
v. Use chapter 4 for the processing of informal complaints and chapter 5 for the processing 
of formal and anonymous complaints. 
w. Use chapter 6 for the procedures when approached by a Service member who alleges 
retaliation related to a harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint. 
x. Consult the servicing CCS to provide analysis and recommendations regarding all 
informal, formal and anonymous harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints as well as 
any other issues that affect the climate of a unit. 
y. Track and monitor the reporting and status of their command and subordinate command's 
harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints. 
z. Ensure substantiated harassment or prohibited discrimination complaints are annotated on 
the offender's performance evaluation or service record. 
aa. Upon turnover, provide the incoming commander with a written report of all command 
and subordinate commands open harassment and prohibited discrimination complaint 
investigations. 
ab. Ensure that harassment and prohibited discrimination is absent in all administrative and 
disciplinary proceedings. 
ac. Ensure personnel receive awards and recognition and are assigned jobs, education 
opportunities and special programs based on merit, fitness, capability and performance. 
ad. EO, Harassment and Resolution Options GMT should be delivered to the appropriate 
audience at an appropriate periodicity as determined by the local command. The frequency of 
periodic training will be no less than every 2 years. SELRES personnel receive training from 
their Navy Reserve Activity (NRA). All SELRES personnel assigned to a commissioned unit 
receive training from their supported command. This provides an opportunity for leaders to 
personally interact with their Sailors to share insight on the issues affecting warfighting 
readiness. 
6. CRT 
a. CRT members must have a letter of designation signed by the commander and sign the 
CRT non-disclosure agreement document, appendix K. 
b. Administer the command climate assessment. The CRT must use the Command 
Resilience Team Guide when conducting a climate assessment. Required CRT membership is 
outlined in this guide. 
3-7 


[PAGE 23]
OPNAVINST 5354.11 
5 Jun 2025 
c. Prior to initiating a command climate assessment, the CRT should contact their servicing 
CCS. When requested, the CCS will provide oversight and guidance to the CRT on the 
facilitation and interpretation of the Defense Organizational Climate Survey (DEOCS), 
conducting focus groups and interviews, data analysis throughout the command climate 
assessment process, use of primary prevention and human factors process resources by CRT and 
the development of the command climate assessment executive summary and Plan of Action and 
Milestones (POA&M). 
d. To improve insight into command climate, the commander must leverage the CRT to 
facilitate and promote signature behaviors and an enviromnent of dignity and respect. In doing 
so, the CRT will be a powerful tool to help preserve unit cohesion, good order and discipline and 
mission readiness. 
e. The CRT must meet, at a minimum, quarterly. CRTs will develop best practices and 
implement primary prevention measures. These meetings must be documented via an MFR and 
the documentation maintained in the command continuity folder. 
f. 
Provide commanders, their deputy, XO or assistant officer in charge and senior enlisted 
leader an MEO and command climate brief within 60 days of assuming command. 
7. ccs 
a. Inform the commander and CMEO program manager of all changes to this instruction. 
b. Provide analysis and recommendations to the commander regarding all infonnal, formal 
and anonymous harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints, as requested. 
c. Conduct on-site or virtual assessments and inspections of immediate subordinate 
commands' CCSs and CMEO programs every 2years using appendices G and H, as applicable. 
d. Provide MEO program oversight, assist visits and training to the command and 
subordinate commands as requested or required. 
e. Maintain the information contained in subparagraphs 7 e( 1) through 7 e( 6) for all 
subordinate commands. 
(1) Command climate assessment supporting documentation, to include the executive 
summary and POA&M, for the last 3 years. 
(2) Results of the comprehensive visual inspections for the last 3 years. 
(3) Results of the last three on-site or virtual assessments and inspections. 
3-8 


[PAGE 24]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
( 4) Complaint log of all harassment, prohibited discrimination complaints and allegations 
of wrongful broadcast or distribution of intimate visual images for the last 3 years. 
( 5) Documentation of all administered MEO training outlined in chapter 7, for the last 3 
years. 
(6) A copy of the NAVPERS 5354/2 Naval Equal Opportunity and Sexual Harassment 
Report Form documenting infonnal complaints of harassment and prohibited discrimination for 
the last 3 years. 
f. 
When requested, provide oversight and guidance to the command and subordinate 
command's CRT throughout the command climate assessment process. 
g. Track and monitor the command and subordinate command's command climate 
assessment. 
h. Review the command climate assessment executive summary, POA&M and DEOCS and 
provide a report to the ISIC prior to a commander's face-to-face debrief. 
i. 
Collaborate and coordinate with the CRT to provide advice and guidance to the 
commander on all matters and issues that may affect the command's climate. 
j. Provide assistance, advice and training regarding conflict resolution and grievance and 
redress procedures. 
k. Serve as the central point of contact for all MEO and command climate issues. Provide 
guidance and training to CMEO program managers regarding the processing of infonnal, formal 
and anonymous harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints using chapter 4 and 
chapter 5. 
I. 
Use chapter 4 for the processing of infonnal complaints and chapter 5 for the processing 
of formal and anonymous complaints. 
m. Use chapter 6 for the appropriate procedures when approached by a Service member who 
alleges retaliation related to a harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint. 
n. Track and monitor the reporting and status of their command and subordinate commands' 
harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints. The data elements outlined in appendix D 
are required to be captured and forwarded to OPNAV NI 70C. 
3-9 


[PAGE 25]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
o. Track allegations of wrongful broadcast or distribution of intimate visual images. The 
data elements outlined in appendix D are required to be captured and forwarded to OPNA V 
Nl70C. 
p. Collaborate with the investigating officer, the judge advocate supporting the staff and the 
echelon 2 CCS in the chain of command, as necessary. This includes, but is not limited to, the 
judge advocate conducting a legal sufficiency review, consultation throughout the complaint 
investigative process and conducting an appeal review when a member exercises his or her right 
to appeal the decision on a formal harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint. The judge 
advocate supporting the staff is responsible for following up on all legal sufficiency reviews. 
q. Provide commanders a quarterly verbal brief and written report of the status of 
subordinate command's harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints. 
r. 
Provide semi-annual MEO training to subordinate command CCSs and CMEO program 
managers. This may be accomplished by symposium attendance, virtually, through 
teleconferences, etc. CCSs are responsible for the sustainment training of their subordinate 
command CMEO program managers. 
s. Maintain a current point of contact listing of subordinate command CCSs and CMEO 
program managers. 
t. 
Liaise between the command, respective echelon 2 command and OPNA V Nl 70C as 
needed. 
u. Collaborate with other CCSs and CMEO program managers on the installation. 
8. CMEO Program Manager 
a. Contact their respective CCS within 30 days of being designated as the CMEO program 
manager. 
b. Function as the single point of contact when a CCS is not assigned to the command for 
MEO matters at the command. 
c. Assess the CMEO program using appendix G upon designation as the CMEO program 
manager and annually thereafter. 
d. Maintain a command continuity folder. This folder will contain the information listed in 
subparagraphs Sd(l) through 8d(6). 
(1) Command climate assessment supporting documentation, to include the executive 
summary and POA&M, for the last 3 years. 
3-10 


[PAGE 26]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(2) Results of the comprehensive visual inspections for the last 3 years. 
(3) Results of the last 3 on-site or virtual assessments and inspections. 
( 4) Complaint log of all harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints and 
allegations of wrongful broadcast or distribution of intimate visual images for the last 3 years. 
( 5) Documentation of all administered MEO training outlined in chapter 7 for the last 3 
years. 
(6) A copy of the NAVPERS 5354/2 documenting informal complaints of harassment 
and prohibited discrimination for the last 3 years. 
e. Serve as the coordinator for the command climate assessment. 
f. 
Ensure NA VPERS l 5600E is prominently displayed in the command. Ensure the poster 
includes the name and telephone number of the command's points of contact (CCS, CMEO 
program manager and the appropriate servicing EEO office) for EO issues. 
g. Use chapter 4 for the processing of informal complaints and chapter 5 for the processing 
of formal and anonymous complaints. 
h. Use chapter 6 for the appropriate procedures when approached by a Service member who 
alleges retaliation related to a harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint. 
i. 
Track, monitor, report and provide status updates on harassment and prohibited 
discrimination complaints to the respective CCS from submission through resolution of the 
complaint. The data elements outlined in appendix D are required to be captured and forwarded 
to OPNA V NI 70C. 
j. Track allegations of wrongful broadcast or distribution of intimate visual image. The 
data elements outlined in appendix D are required to be captured and forwarded to OPNA V 
Nl70C. 
k. Coordinate and monitor MEO training when directed by the commander. 
I. 
Attend semi-annual MEO sustainment training provided by the servicing CCS. 
m. Closely collaborate with the staff, regional, strike group, installation and command CCSs, 
as applicable. 
n. Perfonn other MEO related duties as mandated by the commander. 
3-11 


[PAGE 27]
9. Service Member 
a. Treat others with dignity and respect. 
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
b. Promote a positive command climate within the Navy through personal example. 
c. Report acts of harassment and prohibited discrimination as directed by reference (i), 
article 1137. 
d. Use Navy grievance and redress procedures as applicable. 
e. Be aware of the policies and procedures for filing a complaint in line with this 
instruction. 
f. 
Prevent destructive behaviors and promote an environment of professionalism, trust, 
dignity and respect for all. 
3-12 


[PAGE 28]
CHAPTER4 
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
PROCEDURES FOR SUBMITTING, HANDLING AND RESOLVING INFORMAL 
HARASSMENT AND PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATION COMPLAINTS 
I. General Guidelines 
a. An infonnal complaint is an allegation of harassment or prohibited discrimination 
submitted orally or in writing to a member in a position of authority in the chain of command for 
resolution (i.e., the leading petty officer, chief petty officer, division officer, department head, 
etc.). 
b. The chain of command is the primary and preferred channel to identify, process and 
resolve harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints. The infonnal complaint process 
allows CCSs or CMEO program managers to maintain awareness of all complaints and ensures 
they are properly handled and resolved. The chain of command must submit the informal 
complaint to the CCS or CMEO program manager for resolution without the command being 
required to conduct an investigation. There is no admission of guilt or substantiation of infonnal 
complaints. Any informal complaint that results in punitive disciplinary action by the chain of 
command intended to hold an alleged offender accountable must be processed in line with 
chapter 5. 
c. The CCS or CMEO program manager must ensure proper documentation of all informal 
complaints using NAVPERS 5354/2. 
d. Any complaint submitted to the commander directly by the complainant for resolution 
must be processed in line with chapter 5. 
e. Complaints involving sexual assault allegations must be reported to a Sexual Assault 
Response Coordinator (SARC) for victim support services. These complaints must also be 
reported for investigation to the appropriate military criminal investigative organization. 
2. Complainant Responsibilities 
a. Complainants are encouraged to inform the alleged offender directly that the conduct is 
unwelcome and must stop; however, this is not required. If the behavior does not stop, if 
possible, the complainant should report the behavior to leadership at the lowest appropriate level. 
b. A Service member who desires to resolve a complaint informally, may notify a member 
in a position of authority in the chain of command, the CCS or the CMEO program manager of 
their complaint orally or in writing. Service members should specify that they wish to handle 
their complaint informally, both to the individual to which they make their initial complaint and 
also on the NA VPERS 5354/2. 
4-1 


[PAGE 29]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
c. At any time the complainant can stop this process and submit a formal complaint to the 
CCS or CMEO program manager. 
3. Command Responsibility 
a. The member in a position of authority in the chain of command receiving the complaint 
must infonn the CCS or CMEO program manager within 24 hours. 
b. The CCS or CMEO program manager will initiate infonnal resolution procedures, 
appendix M, within 3 duty days to resolve the informal complaint. 
c. The informal complaint must be documented on the NAVPERS 5354/2. 
d. It is critical that once the CCS or CMEO program manager is informed of an informal 
complaint that action is taken quickly to resolve the complaint. The complaint must be resolved 
within 30 duty days. If the complaint is not or cannot be resolved within 30 duty days or the 
complainant is not satisfied with the outcome, the complainant may file a fonnal complaint. 
e. The CCS or CMEO program manager must conduct a follow-up debrief with the 
complainant to ensure that retaliation has not occurred within 45 days after the complaint is 
closed. This follow-up must be annotated on the NAVPERS 5354/2. 
f. 
Forward a copy of the completed NAVPERS 5354/2 to the echelon 2 CCS. The data 
elements outlined in appendix D are required to be captured and forwarded to OPNA V NJ 70C. 
g. All documents pertinent to an infonnal complaint must be maintained in the command 
continuity folder for 3 years. After 3 years, destroy records in line with reference (a) and local 
records disposition policy. 
4-2 


[PAGE 30]
30 
days 
Complaint made to a member 
in the chain of command 
24 hours 
Inform CCS or CMEO 
program manager 
CCS or CMEO program 
manager use informal 
resolution system 
CCS or CMEO program 
manager provided resolution, 
detennine if further action is 
needed 
Complaint 
resolved 
t 
Yes 
C 
Complaint closed 
.----.. 
No 
) 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
Document on 
NA VPERS 5354/2 
Option to submit fo rmal 
complaint 
Conduct follow-up debrief with 
complainant within 45 days after 
complaint closed 
Figure 4-1 lnfonnal Complaint Process Flow Chart 
Note: At any time the complainant can stop this process and submit a formal complaint. 
4-3 


[PAGE 31]
CHAPTERS 
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
PROCEDURES FOR SUBMITTING, HANDLING, APPEALING AND REPORTING 
FORMAL AND ANONYMOUS HARASSMENT AND PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATION 
COMPLAINTS 
1. General Procedures 
a. A fonnal complaint is an allegation of harassment or unlawful discrimination that is 
submitted in writing via NAVPERS 5354/2; reference (i), article 1150; reference (f), article 138; 
communication to NA VINSGEN or elected officials; NA VPERS 1626/7 Report and Disposition 
ofOffense(s); and any other communication the commander deems appropriate. 
b. The chain of command is the primary and preferred channel identify, process and resolve 
harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints. Commanders have direct responsibility 
for managing the complaint process. They must ensure that the complaint resolution system is 
clearly communicated and well understood by all personnel. 
c. Individuals who experience or observe harassment or prohibited discrimination are 
encouraged to report the incident to the chain of command, CCS or CMEO program manager. 
Formal complaints submitted to a cognizant commander or supervisor or, inspector general's 
office will be referred to a CCS or CMEO program manager for processing. 
d. Formal complaint investigations will be conducted at the local command in line with 
reference (j). 
2. Complaint Processing 
a. In a joint military environment, when the complainant and alleged offender are assigned 
to different organizations and the commander of the joint military enviromnent does not have 
command or supervisory authority over the alleged offender, complaints will be processed in line 
with the procedures outlined in subparagraphs 2a(l) trough 2a(6). 
(1) Complaints must be processed by the organization that has administrative control 
over the complainant. 
(2) Joint commanders must forward the complaint, with a detailed description of the facts 
and circumstances, to the next superior officer in the alleged offender's chain of command who 
is authorized to convene a general court martial. 
(3) The complainant's commander or supervisor is responsible for providing notice and 
sending updates to the alleged offender's commander or supervisor, upon receipt and final 
resolution of a complaint. 
5-1 


[PAGE 32]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(4) The complainant's commander or supervisor is responsible for ensuring the 
completed complaint fonns are provided to the alleged offender's commander or supervisor. 
(5) When an administrative finding substantiates an allegation of harassment or 
prohibited discrimination, the alleged offender's commander or supervisor is responsible for 
administering appropriate corrective or disciplinary action. 
(6) If the complainant is assigned to the Navy the complainant's command is responsible 
for sending the initial and final Operational Report (OPREP) ii). line with reference (k). 
b. When the complainant and alleged offender are assigned to different services (when all 
parties are not assigned to a joint military enviromnent), the complaint must be processed in line 
with the procedures outlined in subparagraphs 2b(l) through 2b(5). 
(1) Complaints must be processed by the organization that has administrative control 
over the complainant. 
(2) The complainant's commander or supervisor is responsible for providing notice and 
sending updates to the alleged offender's commander or supervisor, upon receipt and final 
resolution of a complaint. 
(3) The complainant's commander or supervisor is responsible for ensuring the 
completed complaint forms are provided to the alleged offender's commander or supervisor. 
(4) When an administrative finding substantiates an allegation of harassment or 
prohibited discrimination, the alleged offender's commander or supervisor is responsible for 
administering appropriate corrective or disciplinary action. 
(5) If the complainant is assigned to the Navy the complainant command is responsible 
for sending the initial and final OPREP in line with reference (k). 
c. When the complainant and alleged offender are assigned to different Navy commands the 
complaint must be processed in line with the procedures outlined in subparagraphs 2c(l) through 
2c(3). 
(1) Complaints must be processed by the organization that has administrative control 
over the alleged offender. 
(2) The complainant's command is responsible for ensuring parts I and II ofNAVPERS 
5354/2 are complete and provided to the alleged offender's commander. 
(3) The alleged offender's command is responsible for sending OPREPS, in line with 
reference (k), upon initial receipt through case resolution. If the complainant or alleged offender 
5-2 


[PAGE 33]
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
requests an appeal, update OPREPS must be sent every 30 days; every 14 days for sexual 
harassment complaints, throughout the appeal process. 
Note: Coordination between CCSs or CMEO program managers across command or 
service lines is critical. The commanders of both the complainant and alleged offender 
must collaborate to resolve the complaint. 
d. When the complaint includes both military and civilian personnel, it must be processed in 
line with the procedures applicable to the complainant. Coordination between CCSs or CMEO 
program managers, civilian EEO personnel and the Office of General Counsel is critical. The 
military member's command is responsible for sending OPREPS, in line with reference (k), upon 
initial receipt through case resolution. 
e. SELRES personnel attached to commissioned units must submit complaints via the 
operational chain of command. SELRES personnel attached to a voluntary training unit or an 
operational support unit must submit complaints via their NA VOPSPTCEN. SELRES personnel 
attached to non-commissioned units must submit complaints via the active duty supported 
command. 
f. 
When the complainant is a foreign military Service member, to include international 
military students and the alleged offender is assigned to a Navy command, the complaint must be 
processed in line with the procedures outlined in subparagraphs 2f(l) through 2f( 4). 
(1) Complaints must be processed by the organization that has administrative control 
over the alleged offender. Notification of initiation of a processed complaint must be made to 
Navy International Programs Office and Naval Education and Training Security Assistance Field 
Activity given responsibility for Foreign Military Sales training and education participants under 
SECNAVINST 4950.4B. 
(2) When an administrative finding substantiates an allegation of harassment or 
prohibited discrimination, the alleged offender's commander or supervisor is responsible for 
administering appropriate corrective or disciplinary action. 
(3) The alleged offender's command is responsible for ensuring the NA VPERS 5354/2 is 
complete. 
(4) The alleged offender's command is responsible for sending the initial and final 
OPREP in line with reference (k). 
g. A harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint filed via reference (i), article 1150 
or reference (f), article 138, must be processed in line with reference G). 
5-3 


[PAGE 34]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
h. Complaints involving sexual assault allegations must be reported to a SARC for victim 
support services. These complaints must also be reported for investigation to the appropriate 
military criminal investigative organization. 
i. 
Any allegations of harassment or prohibited discrimination made against a contract 
employee must be submitted to the contracting officer's representative in coordination with the 
Office of General Counsel for appropriate action. 
j. Follow procedures for processing sexual harassment complaints, including anonymous 
complaints, occurring in confinement facilities and involving military inmates, per Section 
15601 of Title 42, U.S.C., also known as the "Prison Rape Elimination Act of2003." 
3. Complainant Responsibilities 
a. The preferred method of filing a formal complaint is by submitting a NAVPERS 5354/2. 
Other complaint options include (but are not limited to) those in subparagraphs 3a(l) through 
3a(6). 
(1) Filing a reference (i), article 1150, Redress of Wrong Committed by a Superior (other 
than the Commander). 
(2) Filing a reference (f), article 138, Complaints of Wrongs against the Commander. 
(3) Filing a NAVPERS 1626/7. 
(4) Contacting the IG which includes echelon 2 IGs and the NAVINSGEN. 
(5) Communicating with elected officials, reference (i), article 1155. 
(6) Any other means of communication that the commander deems appropriate ( e.g.; 
notes in the commanding officers suggestion box, comments on the DEOCS, etc.). 
b. A complaint should be made within 60 days of the offending incident or in the case of a 
series of incidents, within 60 days of the most recent incident. Commanders may accept 
complaints beyond this time frame if, in their judgment, circumstances warrant. 
c. Complaints of harassment (not to include hazing and bullying) and prohibited 
discrimination complaints may not be joined with the complaints of other individuals. Similarly, 
each complainant may seek redress for the wrong( s) of only one alleged offender. If the 
complainant believes more than one alleged offender has committed a wrong, the complainant 
must submit a separate complaint against each alleged offender, not against a group such as "the 
chain of command." 
5-4 


[PAGE 35]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
4. Anonymous Complaints. Action taken regarding an anonymous complaint will depend upon 
the extent of information provided by the complainant. 
Note: Service Members cannot identify themselves to the command and then elect to 
submit the complaint anonymously. 
a. If the content of the complaint includes allegations of sexual assault and if continued 
communication is possible, the CCS or CMEO program manager must refer the Service member 
to a SARC, Deployed Resiliency Counselor (DRC), sexual assault prevention and response 
(SAPR) Victim Advocate (VA), unit SAPR VA, Victim's Legal Counsel (VLC) or healthcare 
personnel. 
b. The command CCS or CMEO program manager must be notified of anonymous 
complaints within 24 hours of receipt and must consult with the commander to determine further 
actions regarding the allegations. 
c. If the complaint contains sufficient information to permit the initiation of an 
investigation, it must be processed as outlined in this chapter. It must be documented on the 
NAVPERS 5354/2, and that form must be forwarded to OPNAV Nl 70C via the echelon 2 CCS 
within 72 hours after complaint resolution. 
d. If the anonymous complaint does not contain sufficient infonnation to pennit the 
initiation of an investigation the infonnation must be documented on the NA VPERS 5354/2 and 
maintained in the command continuity folder for 3 years. The NA VPERS 5354/2 must contain 
the date and time the information was received, a detailed description of the facts and 
circumstances included in the complaint, date the complaint was closed and by whom and other 
pertinent information. 
5. Command Responsibility 
a. Personnel receiving a formal complaint must notify the commander or other designated 
authority within 3 duty days of receipt. 
b. Upon receipt of a formal complaint, the commander with jurisdiction over the subject of 
the complaint has 1 duty day to evaluate the complaint and determine to either dismiss, refer or 
accept the complaint for appropriate action. 
(1) Dismissed Complaints. A commander with jurisdiction over the alleged offender of 
the complaint, in consultation with the supporting CCS and judge advocate, may detennine that 
dismissal ofa complaint is appropriate under one of the bases in subparagraphs 5b(l)(a) through 
5b(l)(f). A previously accepted complaint may be dismissed if, at any point following 
acceptance of the complaint, the commander deems it appropriate to dismiss the complaint under 
one of the bases outlined in subparagraphs 5b(l)(a) through 5b(l)(f). If the c01runander 
5-5 


[PAGE 36]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
dismisses a complaint, a justification for the commander's decision will be documented on an 
MFR and a copy provided to the complainant. The original NAVPERS 5354/2 and the MFR 
will be retained in the command continuity folder for 3 years. No OPREP is required for 
dismissed complaints unless there was an initial OP REP prior to the determination of dismissal. 
The reasons for dismissal are included in subparagraphs 5b(l)(a) through 5b(l)(f). 
(a) A claim that fails to allege facts that, if true, would constitute a violation under 
this instruction. 
(b) If the complainant's claims are identical to claims that were previously filed or 
resolved, the complaint may be dismissed. In cases where an informal complaint was submitted 
but not satisfactorily resolved, a complaint should not be automatically dismissed as duplicative. 
The commander must assess if the infonnal complaint was appropriately resolved before 
rendering decision to accept, refer or dismiss complaints submitted in such cases. 
( c) Complaints of institutional discrimination. 
( d) A complaint that has been accepted for investigation may be dismissed at any 
stage of processing if the complainant fails to cooperate with the investigation or with repeated 
requests for information. The initial submission of an anonymous complaint does not constitute 
a failure to cooperate. 
( e) A complaint received after 60 days; 120 days in the case of a Reserve complaint, 
is considered late. Late reporting may impact a commander's ability to gather evidence and 
interview witnesses. A commander in consultation with the servicing CCS and supporting judge 
advocate may determine that an investigation cannot be undertaken due to the lateness of the 
complaint. 
(f) A complainant may voluntarily withdraw their complaint at any time during the 
administrative process. However, the commander may continue to take actions necessary to 
maintain good order and discipline within the command. 
(2) Referred Complaints. Complaints submitted by persons not covered by this 
instruction or of which neither the command nor the Navy has jurisdiction or the authority to 
remedy, will be referred to the relevant agency or agencies with personnel and subject matter 
jurisdiction to adjudicate the case, if applicable. A justification for the commander's decision to 
refer the complaint and the organization to which it is referred will be documented on an MFR 
and a copy provided to the complainant. The original NAVPERS 5354/2 and the MFR will be 
retained in the command continuity folder for 3 years. No OPREP is required for referred 
complaints. 
(3) Accepted Complaints. If the commander accepts a fonnal complaint, it must be 
processed in line with this chapter. 
5-6 


[PAGE 37]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
c. Refer all complaints against flag officers or SES officials to NAVINSGEN. 
d. Ensure all personnel are aware of command and shore based assistance available to those 
who need help in processing complaints. This assistance includes access to legal counsel, CCSs, 
CMEO program managers and the Navy Harassment Prevention and MEO Advice Line. 
e. Identify available counseling support or referral services for all personnel involved in 
incidents of harassment and prohibited discrimination. These services include, but are not 
limited to, access to mental health counseling, medical, legal counsel, family advocacy 
personnel, fleet and family support center personnel, chaplains, CCSs, CMEO program 
managers, Victim and Witness Assistance Personnel and the Navy Harassment Prevention and 
MEO Advice Line. Personnel should notify the CCS or CMEO program manager if they would 
like to be referred to support services. 
f. 
Commanders have the discretion to initiate an investigation without a complainant; i.e., 
complaints submitted anonymously, if the aggrieved party does not want to paiiicipate in the 
complaint process, concerns identified during the climate assessment or if possible harassment or 
prohibited discrimination violations are identified during an investigation of other misconduct. 
In such cases, if an investigation is initiated, the commander will process and report the violation 
and subsequent outcomes in line with this chapter. Commanders will use the NA VPERS 5354/2 
to document the issue and actions taken. No signature from a complainant is required; however, 
the data elements outlined in appendix D are required to be captured and forwarded to OPNA V 
Nl70C. 
g. The commander must initiate a preliminary inquiry or command investigation, as 
appropriate in line with reference (j). The CCS or CMEO prograin manager must not be the 
preliminary inquiry or command investigation officer. 
Note: If the complaint is against the commander it must be forwarded to the officer 
exercising general court-martial jurisdiction over the commander. 
(1) To the extent practicable the inquiry or investigation must commence within 72 hours 
of the commander accepting the complaint. Whenever practical, the inquiry or investigating 
officer must be senior to the complainant and the alleged offender and a CCS must serve as a 
resource to the investigator. The complainant and alleged offender will be notified by the 
investigating officer that the investigation has begun and will acknowledge this notification on 
the original NA VPERS 5354/2. Commands that do not have a CCS assigned within their 
reporting chain of command or when the CCS is unavailable or conflicted, must contact OPNA V 
NI 70C for a list of CCSs. Before making a final determination the commander who convenes 
the investigation into the complaint, in line with this instruction and reference (1), will submit the 
investigating officer's completed report to a staff judge advocate in the chain of command or 
assigned to support the command and the CCS. The judge advocate and CCS will provide the 
commander with a written legal sufficiency review and CCS sufficiency review, respectively and 
5-7 


[PAGE 38]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
recommendations, if any, within 10 days. The CCS sufficiency review will be conducted using 
OPNAV 5354/3 Command Climate Specialist Formal Harassment or Unlawful Discrimination 
Report Sufficiency Review. 
Note: When other formal complaint options are used to report allegations of 
harassment or prohibited discrimination, the CCS or CMEO program manager will use 
the NAVPERS 5354/2 to document the issue and actions taken. No signature from a 
complainant is required; however, the data elements outlined in appendix D are required 
to be captured and forwarded to OPNAV Nl 70C. Ensure a copy of the NA VPERS 
5354/2 is forwarded to OPNAV NI 70C via the echelon 2 CCS within 72 hours after final 
detennination. The appeals process outlined in paragraph 6 of this chapter only applies 
to formal complaints submitted via the NA VPERS 5354/2. 
(2) Voice reports must be made as outlined in reference (k). 
(3) An OPREP describing the situation must be sent in line with reference (k), no later 
than 72 hours after receipt and acceptance of the complaint. 
(4) Upon receipt and acceptance of a formal complaint, ensure a copy of the NAVPERS 
5354/2, with parts I through III completed, is forwarded to OPNAV Nl 70C via the echelon 2 
CCS or CMEO program manager in the absence of a CCS within 72 hours. The data elements 
outlined in appendix D are required to be captured and forwarded to OPNA V NI 70C. 
( 5) Upon receipt and acceptance of a formal complaint, ensure appendix M, is reviewed 
and signed by the chain of command of the complainant, the chain of command of the alleged 
offender, complainant, alleged offender, witnesses and the CCS or CMEO program manager. 
(6) To the extent practicable, the inquiry or investigation of a fonnal sexual harassment 
complaint must be completed no later than 14 days from the date the investigation commenced. 
The commander receiving the complaint must submit an initial OPREP upon receipt of the 
complaint and a final OPREP, in line with reference(]), section 1561 (Complaints of Sexual 
Harassment: Investigation by Commanding Officers), of the results of the investigation, 
including any action taken as a result of the investigation, to the ISIC within 20 days after the 
date the investigation commenced. When a sexual harassment complaint is not resolved within 
20 days of the commencement of the investigation, submit an OPREP on the progress within 20 
days after the date the investigation commenced and every 14 days thereafter until final 
resolution. Upon final resolution of the complaint, submit a final OPREP on the results of the 
investigation including any action taken as a result of the investigation. The alleged offender's 
command is responsible for sending OPREPS upon initial complaint receipt through complaint 
resolution, including any subsequent appeal( s ). If the alleged offender belongs to another 
service, the complainant's command is responsible for sending the OPREPS upon initial 
complaint receipt through complaint resolution, including any subsequent appeal(s). 
5-8 


[PAGE 39]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(7) For harassment (not to include sexual harassment) and prohibited discrimination 
complaints, the alleged offender's command is responsible for sending the initial and final 
OPREP upon initial complaint receipt and final resolution, including any subsequent appeals. If 
the alleged offender belongs to another service, the complainant's command is responsible for 
sending the initial and final OPREP upon initial complaint receipt and final resolution, including 
any subsequent appeal(s). 
(8) To the extent practicable, the investigation of a formal harassment (not to include 
sexual harassment) and prohibited discrimination complaint must be completed no later than 30 
days from the date the investigation commenced. If, due to extenuating circumstances, it 
becomes impossible to conduct a complete investigation within 30 days, the commander may 
obtain an extension in writing from the next higher commander for usually not more than 30 
calendar days. Upon receipt of an approved extension, the commander must inform the 
complainant and alleged offender of the extension, its duration and the reasons for which it was 
requested. The commander must provide progress reports every 14 calendar days thereafter until 
the investigation is completed and a determination has been made. The investigating officer 
must update the commander and CCS or CMEO program manager on the status of the 
investigation every 14 days. 
(9) The CCS or CMEO program manager must ensure that the complainant and alleged 
offender are updated every 14 days on the status of the complaint through resolution. 
(10) After final determination, the commander must debrief the complainant and alleged 
offender consistent with the requirements of the Privacy Act, Freedom oflnformation Act and 
other applicable laws, regulations and negotiated agreements. The complainant and the alleged 
offender must be notified of the results once the complaint has been resolved and informed of 
their right to appeal the decision. This must be documented on part IV of the NAVPERS 5354/2. 
The complainant and the alleged offender must be informed that the appeal must be selected and 
submitted within 30 duty days of notification. Every effort must be made to notify SELRES 
personnel within 30 calendar days of complaint determination. If notification in person has not 
occurred, member notification and signature must be obtained via certified mail. SELRES 
personnel will have one drill cycle from the date ofreceipt of the certified mail to appeal the 
decision. 
( 11) When requested, the command must provide a redacted copy of the inquiry or 
investigating officer's final report (as directed by the Privacy Act of 1974 and other applicable 
laws and regulations) to the individual that requested the redacted copy within 14 days after the 
request. Information about specific adverse actions taken against an individual generally is not 
disclosed unless such infonnation is a matter of public record (e.g., court-martial proceedings) or 
when otherwise required to be released by statute. 
5-9 


[PAGE 40]
OPNA VINST 5354. IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
Note: If the complainant or alleged offender request a redacted copy of the 
investigating officer's final report during the 30-day appeal timeframe, they get 30 days 
to appeal starting from the date they receive the redacted copy of the report. 
(12) Commanders must conduct a follow-up debrief with the complainant within 45 days 
following the final determination of the complaint. For complaints involving a SELRES 
complainant, follow-up debriefs must continue for a period of I year following resolution. 
Command follow-up will include a determination of level of satisfaction with the resolution of 
the complaint, satisfaction with the effectiveness of corrective action, timeliness, present 
command climate and a review to ensure retaliation did not occur. This debrief must be 
documented on the NA VPERS 5354/2 or an MFR. Ensure a copy of the NAVPERS 5354/2 or 
MFR is forwarded to OPNA V NI 70C via the echelon 2 CCS or the CMEO program manager in 
the absence of a CCS within 72 hours of debrief completion. 
(13) Forward a copy of all completed complaint investigations, with endorsements, to the 
respective echelon 2 or echelon 3 commander via the ISIC. All command investigations and all 
documents pertinent to the formal complaint, must be retained by the convening authority, 
General Court-Martial Convening Authority (GCMCA) or by the last commander to whom they 
are routed for a period of 2 years from the time that they are received. An electronic copy of the 
entire command investigation must be sent to OPNA V NI 70C. 
h. If the complaint alleges a hostile work environment determination, commanders will, 
when possible, temporarily relocate the complainant or alleged offender, without prejudice, 
during the course of the investigation. However, commanders should give consideration to the 
complainant's preference, when possible. Transfer of the complainant or alleged offender 
involved must not be considered by the commander to be a resolution of the complaint. 
i. 
Regardless of the outcome of the investigation (substantiated or unsubstantiated), leaders 
at all levels must not tolerate acts of retaliation, intimidation or discrimination in response to the 
filing of a harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint and will take immediate action to 
identify, prevent and stop all fonns of retaliation within their command. Monitor for potential 
retaliation by checking on work center climate and ensuring perfonnance appraisals document 
job performance accurately (i.e., downgrades must be supported by written counseling and not 
related to the complaint). 
j. In the event a complaint is initially reported as a sexual assault incident and is later re-
characterized as a sexual harassment incident, the reporting and processing requirements of 
handling a sexual harassment complaint will begin once the incident is so re-characterized. In 
this event, if the matter was already investigated, a new investigation is not required, although 
the investigation may need to be reopened and amended to inquire into sexual harassment-
specific issues that may not have been addressed. 
5-10 


[PAGE 41]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
Note: In this event the NA VPERS 5354/2 is still required to be filled out and 
forwarded to OPNAV NI 70C via the echelon 2 CCS, but may be dated to reflect the date 
which the report was re-characterized. 
k. Part IV of the NAVPERS 5354/2 must be used to document actions taken by the 
commander to resolve the complaint and notification of involved parties. Ensure a copy of the 
NA VPERS 5354/2 is forwarded to OPNA V NI 70C via the echelon 2 CCS or the CMEO 
program manager in the absence of a CCS, within 72 hours. 
I. 
Commanders will determine whether a climate assessment is warranted or additional unit 
training is required. 
6. Appeal Process 
a. The administrative appeal process is not applicable to findings rendered pursuant to 
command action under reference (a), (i.e., non-judicial punislnnent or court-martial). 
b. An administrative finding concerning a complaint resolved through the fonnal process 
may be appealed by the complainant or alleged offender within 30 duty days of receiving the 
notice of the finding. 
c. Either the complainant or the alleged offender may appeal the decision on a formal 
complaint. There are two levels of appeal, neither automatic. Each appeal must be affirmatively 
requested by either the complainant or the alleged offender. In addition to the NA VPERS 
5354/2, documentation such as statements of witnesses, personnel record entries, etc., that may 
be helpful in resolving an appeal, may be submitted to the appellate authority by the party 
requesting the appeal. The appellant must submit a statement detailing the reason for the appeal. 
Both parties must initial the NA VPERS 5354/2, as applicable, to declare or decline the request 
for a review. 
Note: The appeal must be requested and all documentation submitted within 30 duty 
days after receiving the notice of finding. 
d. The first level of appeal will be at least two organizational levels above the level at which 
the appellant is assigned, when practicable. For SELRES personnel, the request for an appeal 
must be made within one drill cycle or the complaint will be considered closed. The echelon 2 
CCS must collaborate on the appeal review using OPNAV 5354/4 Command Climate Specialist 
Formal Harassment or Unlawful Discrimination Report Higher Level Review. Commands that 
do not have a CCS assigned within their reporting chain of command or where the CCS is 
unavailable or conflicted, must contact OPNA V NI 70C for a list of CCSs. The review of the 
initial appeal must be completed within 60 calendar days of receipt. 
5-11 


[PAGE 42]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
Note: The CCS that conducted the sufficiency review must not conduct the appeal 
review when a member exercises his or her right to appeal the decision on a fonnal 
complaint. 
e. If a further appeal is requested, the final resolution will rest with SECNA V or his or her 
designee. Once requested, the appellant's commander will forward the complaint and all 
documents pertinent to the complaint to SECNAV, via OJAG Administrative Law (Code 13), for 
final review. The final appeal to SECNA V must be requested within 30 days of receipt of the 
GCMCA's decision on the initial appeal. For SELRES personnel the request for the final appeal 
must be made within one drill cycle from the receipt of the decision on the first appeal or the 
complaint will be considered closed. An appeal requested after 30 days, may be returned as 
untimely, unless unusual circumstances justify the delay. Commands, not designated as appeal 
authority, must forward the appeal up their respective chain of cmmnand within 14 days of 
receipt. 
f. 
An appeal may be submitted on any legal or equitable grounds based upon a perception 
that existing DoD or DON regulations were incorrectly applied in the case, that facts were 
ignored or weighed incorrectly or on any other good faith basis. 
g. Commanders and supervisors are not required to withhold appropriate administrative or 
disciplinary action while an appeal is pending. 
7. Appeal Compliance Review. When a complainant or offender appeals the administrative 
finding concerning a complaint, the questions outlined on the OPNAV 5354/4 should also be 
answered by commanders, supervisors, CCSs and the judge advocate. 
5-12 


[PAGE 43]
30 
days 
30 
days 
Submit formal complaint to 
CCS or CMEO program 
manager 
24 hours 
i 
Provide to commander 
3 duty days • 
Commence investigation 
• 
CCS and legal sufficiency 
review 
J. 
Commander determination 
Debrief complainant and 
alleged offender 
Appeal 
Yes 
Appeal review and 
determination 
-
No 
-
i-
L 
~ 
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
Review retaliation 
awareness 
Voice reports and OPREP 
Notify the CCS (24 hours) 
Notify complainant and 
alleged offender 
Complaint closed; submit 
final OPREP and 5354/2 
Conduct follow-up with 
complainant within 45 days (1 
year for reserve complaints) after 
complaint closed 
Figure 5-1: Formal Complaint Process Flow Chart 
Note: There are two levels ofreview. The first will be at least two organizational 
levels above the level at which the appellant is assigned, when practicable. The final will 
be to SECNAV. 
5-13 


[PAGE 44]
CHAPTER6 
OPNA VINST 5354. IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
RETALIATION RESPONSE PROCEDURES 
1. Purpose. To provide commanders standardized procedures to respond to allegations of 
retaliation related to complaints or intentions to submit a complaint of harassment or prohibited 
discrimination. No person may restrict a Service member to use the informal or formal 
complaint process and in the review or investigative process, no person may restrict a Service 
Member through interference, coercion, discrimination or retaliation during all facets of the 
submission and processing of a grievance or any time thereafter. These procedures also apply to 
uniformed witnesses, bystanders and first responders related to complaints who also perceive 
some kind of retaliation for their involvement. Retaliation may be reported to a supervisor, CCS, 
CMEO program manager, the commander or an IG, who must act upon the report. 
Note: Allegations of reprisal or various forms of retaliation made by civilian 
employees are beyond the scope of this instruction. Civilian personnel are not covered in 
this policy and are covered under separate policies and statutes. 
2. Discussion. No person may restrict a Service member from making a protected 
communication to a member of Congress; an IG; a member of a DoD audit, inspection, 
investigation or law enforcement organization; any person or organization in the chain of 
command; a court-martial proceeding; or any other person or organization designated pursuant to 
command regulations or other established administrative procedures for such communications. 
No person may restrict a Service member from providing testimony or otherwise participating in 
or assisting or planning to assist with an investigation or proceeding involving a protected 
communication. Navy regulations and instructions contain provisions that pennit or require 
DON personnel to report suspected impropriety, including criminal offenses. The use of social 
media, texting and e-mailing to engage or plan to engage, in retaliatory behavior is a fonn of 
online misconduct that undermines good order and discipline of the organization. 
3. Procedures 
a. If a complainant, witness, bystander or first responder related to a harassment or 
prohibited discrimination complainant perceives subsequent retaliation, they may seek support 
from a CCS or CMEO program manager. Individuals can also report to an IG, the command, a 
Military Criminal Investigation Organization (MCIO) or law enforcement for investigation. 
b. Subparagraphs 3b(I) through 3b(8) outline the CCS or CMEO program manager intake 
procedures for allegations of perceived retaliation. While the response process is not complete 
until case disposition is final, the purpose is to understand the full process; to include the 
retaliation report intake process, the commencement of the investigation or other command 
action. 
(1) Discuss what the Service member is experiencing concerning perceived retaliation. 
6-1 


[PAGE 45]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(2) Explain the types ofretaliation and investigative entities ( e.g., command, MCIO, 
Service IG, DoD IG or law enforcement) and provide a copy of appendix M. 
(3) Explain that the Service member can go to an IG at any time during the process. 
Visits to the IG may range from consultation to filing a report. 
(4) Assist and support the Service member in line with references (c) and (m). The 
Service member must be provided adequate protection and care and informed about available 
support resources, to include those outlined in subparagraphs 3b(4)(a) through 3b(4)(c). 
(a) Military and civilian emergency medical and support services. 
(b) Public and private programs that are available to provide counseling, treatment 
and other support. 
( c) Organizations and entities on-and off-base that provide victim and witness 
services and support. 
(5) Discuss with the Service member the options to consult with an IG or a legal 
assistance attorney concerning retaliatory behavior, reporting options and the investigative and 
military justice processes, as appropriate, prior to engaging an investigative entity or seeking 
alternative means for resolving the retaliatory behavior allegation. 
(6) Follow-up with the Service member to ask if the Service member proceeded to file a 
retaliation report after speaking with the legal assistance attorney (if the Service member elected 
to speak with a Special Victim's Counsel, VLC or legal assistance attorney). 
(7) Record the report in the harassment and prohibited discrimination complaint log. The 
information in subparagraphs 3b(8)(a) through 3b(8)(o) will be documented for each retaliation 
report and must be provided to OPNAV Nl 70C. The command of the Service member 
submitting the retaliation report is responsible for sending an OPREP upon initial receipt and 
final resolution of the report. 
(a) Organization providing case information. 
(b) Harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint number. 
(c) Reporter's name, DoD ID number and type. 
Note: An OPREP must not contain personally identifiable information. 
( d) Type ofreporter ( complainant, witness, bystander or first responder). 
6-2 


[PAGE 46]
( e) Date ofretaliation report. 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(f) Nature ofretaliation allegation (reprisal, restriction, ostracism or maltreatment). 
(g) Individual to whom the report ofretaliation was made (CCS, SARC, IG, etc.) 
(h) The alleged retaliator's working relationship to the retaliation reporter at the time 
of the alleged incident. 
(i) The alleged retaliator's working relationship to the alleged offender at the time of 
the alleged incident. 
(i) Sex of the retaliation reporter and alleged retaliator. 
(k) Paygrade of the retaliation reporter and alleged retaliator at the time of the alleged 
incident. 
(1) Date of the associated harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint. 
(m)Name of the complainant in the associated harassment or prohibited 
discrimination complaint if different than the retaliation reporter. 
(n) Type of investigative entity ( command, MCIO, Service IG, DoD IG or law 
enforcement). 
( o) Command action regarding the alleged retaliation and if no action taken the 
reason why. 
c. Subparagraphs 3c(l) through 3c(4) outline the procedures for resolving a retaliation 
report. 
( 1) The CCS or CMEO program manager will inform the retaliation reporter's 
commander if the reporter wishes to pursue action relating to reported conduct that does not fall 
under the jurisdiction of the IG or MCIO. Allegations of restriction or reprisal fall within the 
jurisdiction of the IG in line with reference (1) section 1034 (Protected Communications; 
Prohibition of Retaliatory Personnel Actions) and as such, an investigative detennination will be 
made by the IG. Depending on the facts of the case, ostracism, maltreatment or other retaliatory 
behavior may fall within the jurisdiction of the IG if, for example, it is detennined that they are 
inextricably linked to restriction or reprisal. 
(a) The commander will then decide whether to refer the report for investigation by 
law enforcement or address it through other appropriate investigative means. 
6-3 


[PAGE 47]
OPNA VINST 5354. IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(b) When referred to command for investigation, an individual independent of the 
originating unit or organization of the alleged retaliation will investigate the retaliation reports. 
(c) The chain of command will ensure that the SARC, CCS or CMEO program 
manager and retaliation reporter all remain informed throughout the process. This will include 
any delays of the process and the date when the investigation is complete. 
(2) The CCS or CMEO program manager will notify the appropriate level of command 
of the retaliation report unless the retaliation report is against the immediate commander; then 
the next level of command will be notified and assume responsibility for the case. 
(3) The CCS or CMEO program manager, in coordination with the SARC, will make 
every effort to provide updates to commanders whose personnel are involved in a retaliation 
report, retaliation investigation or both. 
( 4) Commander(s) of the Service member(s), who is a subject of a retaliation report, will 
provide in writing a case status and all disposition data, to include any administrative or judicial 
action taken, stemming from a retaliation investigation to the SARC. 
d. The CCS or CMEO program manager will notify Service members who allege retaliation 
associated with a harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint, that they have the 
opportunity to communicate with a flag officer in their chain of command regarding career-
related impacts and administrative separation actions they perceive to be associated with the 
report or involvement in the incident. 
6-4 


[PAGE 48]
CHAPTER 7 
TRAINING 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
1. General Training Requirements. Commanders detennine how best to accomplish harassment 
prevention and MEO training. The most effective method to conduct training is through small 
group discussions and scenario based training with the CCS or CMEO program manager as a 
facilitator. The training facilitator must promote the chain of command as the primary channel 
for addressing complaints, while providing information regarding reporting options, procedures 
and applicable timelines to submit harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints 
(including anonymous complaints and complaints involving a Service member's commander or 
supervisor) to the appropriate commander or supervisor, inspector general's office, CCS or 
CMEO program manager. The training content will be appropriate to the Service member's 
grade and commensurate with their level of responsibility. 
2. Orientation Training. Harassment and MEO training must be provided to all newly assigned 
Service members. The training will encompass the entire cycle of harassment and prohibited 
discrimination prevention, reporting, response, accountability procedures and processes through 
which Service members may report harassment, prohibited discrimination or retaliation. 
Training must be administered within 60 calendar days. 
3. CMT. Facilitator led, small group training that includes how to identify, define and report all 
fonns of harassment and prohibited discrimination. Specifically, it is important to educate 
members on the delineation of the various forms of harassment, illustrate the destructive impact 
of these behaviors and ensure Sailors are equipped with the tools to intervene, when necessary. 
Training will include leadership roles and responsibilities for MEO programs, complaints 
processing, retaliation prevention and detection, methodologies, options for obtaining assistance 
when the alleged offender is the commander or in the complainant's chain of command and 
witnesses and bystander intervention protection. In line with reference (f), all DON personnel, 
military and civilian, must be educated and trained upon accession and periodically thereafter 
(including throughout professional military education systems) in the areas of identification, 
prevention, resolution and elimination of sexual harassment. The frequency of periodic training 
will be no less than every 2 years. Periodic training will include the application of pertinent, 
anonymous reporting as well as informal and formal resolution procedures. 
4. Professional Military Education and Leadership Development Training. This training is 
critical to ensure personnel fully understand the importance of identifying and eliminating 
harassment and prohibited discrimination and how it undennines our leadership abilities and 
impacts command climate. These training sessions should stress how to build and maintain 
professional working relationships and how fairness and unbiased actions are part of the Navy's 
core values and signature behaviors. Instruction should be appropriate to the rank and 
experience of the attendees and should include: 
a. An overview of the harassment prevention and MEO program. 
7-1 


[PAGE 49]
(]) The definition of harassment and prohibited discrimination. 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(2) The consequences of harassing and prohibited discriminatory behaviors. 
(3) Available resources to discuss concerns on addressing actions potentially perceived as 
harassment or prohibited discrimination. 
b. The commander's and senior enlisted Service Member's role in the harassment 
prevention and MEO program. 
c. Information on retaliation. 
(1) Available resource(s) regarding retaliation. 
(2) Chain of command responsibilities for allegations ofretaliation. 
(3) Incidents and negative behaviors that can affect command climate. 
d. Continuing education and training to ensure mastery and competency in the MEO field. 
e. A training module for new or prospective commanders at all levels of command. The 
training will be tailored to the responsibilities and leadership requirements of Service members 
as they are assigned to command positions. The training will address fostering a climate that 
does not tolerate harassment or prohibited discrimination, encourages Service member 
intervention to prevent potential incidents of harassment and prohibited discrimination and 
encourage reporting incidents of harassment and prohibited discrimination. 
f. 
Training topics for understanding the needs of and the resources available to, the 
complainant, assigning investigating officers for alleged incidents of harassment and prohibited 
discrimination and understanding available disciplinary options, including court-martial, non-
judicial punishment and administrative action. 
5. Harassment Prevention and MEO Training at Pre-Commissioning Programs. A CCS or 
CMEO program manager will provide initial training and annually thereafter. The training will 
include, at minimum: 
a. Instruction on the Navy Harassment Prevention and MEO Program policy and reporting 
options and processes (informal, fonnal or anonymous) through which a harassment or 
prohibited discrimination or retaliation complaint may be filed. 
b. A brief history of the problem(s), nature and consequences of harassment and prohibited 
discrimination in the military services and retaliation (including use of social media and 
7-2 


[PAGE 50]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
electronic communications), to effectively identify, report and eradicate harassment and 
prohibited discrimination. 
6. CMEO Program Manager Training. All assigned CMEO program managers must attend the 
CMEO Manager course (A-500-0009) delivered by NETC. This training is designed to provide 
CMEO program managers the general skills for managing the command's MEO objectives for 
their commander. 
7. Sustaimnent Training. All CCSs and CMEO program managers must receive semi-annual 
sustaimnent training conducted by a CCS. Echelon 2 CCSs will provide semi-annual training to 
echelon 3 and 4 CCSs. This training will be used to reinforce this instruction, provide MEO 
objectives updates and examine command trends. 
8. Annual CCS Training. All CCSs will attend annual training conducted face-to-face by 
OPNA V NI 70C. This training must be used to reinforce this instruction, provide programmatic 
and instruction updates, share best practices and, leverage data analytics to illustrate trends, 
programmatic impacts and data driven recommendations. 
9. Leadership Training Awareness Seminar (LTAS). Senior leaders may consider attending the 
I-week, unit-funded LTAS at DEOMI. LTAS is designed to present senior leaders with an 
orientation on the intrapersonal, interpersonal and organizational aspects of human relations, EO 
and EEO in order to gain an understanding of their impacts on unit cohesion and mission 
effectiveness. Seats for the DEOMI LTAS are limited. For enrollment infonnation please 
contact DEOMI student services at (321) 494-4617/5874, Defense Switched Network (854) or 
by e-mail to deomiss@us.af.mil. 
7-3 


[PAGE 51]
APPENDIX A 
REFERENCES 
1. References 
(a) SECNAV M-5210.1 of23 September 2019 
(b) DoD Instruction 1350.02 of 4 September 2020 
(c) DoD Instruction 1020.03 of 17 January 2025 
(d) SECNAVINST 5350.16A 
(e) SECNAVINST 5300.26E 
(f) Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(g) DoD Instruction 1325.06 of 20 December 2021 
(h) SECNAVINST 5370.7E 
(i) U.S. Navy Regulations, 1990 
(j) JAGINST 5800.7F 
(k) OPNA VINST F3100.6K (NOTAL) 
(I) 10 U.S.C. 
(m)DoD Instruction 6400.07 of6 July 2018 
(n) DoD Directive 7050.06 of 12 October 2021 
2. Additional References. Refer to appendix J, paragraph 9. 
A-1 
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
Appendix A 


[PAGE 52]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
APPENDIXB 
DEFINITIONS 
1. Alleged Offender. Anyone who is alleged to have committed a violation of this instruction 
and is the subject of an informal, fonnal or anonymous complaint. 
2. Appropriate Authority. To qualify for protection under reference (h), a protected 
communication must be made to: 
a. a member of Congress; 
b. an IG, as defined in reference (h); 
c. a member of a DoD audit, inspection, investigation or law enforcement organization; 
d. any person or organization in the chain of command; 
e. a court-martial proceeding; 
f. 
any other person or organization designated following regulations or other established 
administrative procedures for such communications; or 
g. any person conducting an investigation or proceeding related to a protected 
communication. 
3. Climate Assessment. A systematic procedure used to gather, synthesize and report key 
perceptions, attitudes and behaviors within an organization, all which can affect unit readiness. 
A complete assessment includes a DEOCS in addition to using data gathered from interviews, 
observations and existing records or reports in order to fonn a complete and actionable picture of 
organizational climate. 
4. Color. Skin tone or complexion. Even though race and color clearly overlap, they are not 
synonymous. Thus, color harassment or discrimination can occur between persons of different 
races or ethnicities or between persons of the same race or ethnicity. 
5. CCS Sufficiency Review. A review of the investigation, by the CCS, to ensure: 
a. All accepted allegations were thoroughly addressed in the investigation. 
b. The investigation included a thorough review of the circumstances under which the 
alleged behavior occurred. 
B-1 
Appendix B 


[PAGE 53]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
c. There is no evidence of bias (a highly personal and unreasoned distortion of judgment) by 
the investigating officer. 
d. There is no evidence the complainant rather than the alleged behavior was investigated. 
6. CMEO Program Manager. Command member (must be an E6 or above with at least 8 years 
of service) appointed in writing by the commander, who functions as the single point of contact 
when a CCS is not assigned to the command for MEO matters within the command. 
7. 
CCS. Member who has completed the DEOMI Equal Opportunity Advisor Course, to 
include the Navy Service Specific Course and has been assigned the Navy enlisted classification 
code 809A. CCSs provide oversight, training and assist visits to subordinate and area command 
CCSs and CMEO program managers. A CCS is the subject matter expert for the commander on 
the DEOCS, command climate assessments and the handling and processing of harassment and 
prohibited discrimination complaints. Assigned CCSs strengthen the chain of command by 
keeping the leadership team aware of existing or potential MEO related matters as well as 
procedures and practices that affect the mission, readiness, welfare and morale of all Sailors in 
the command. CCSs are assigned to major shore commands, nuclear aircraft carriers, 
amphibious assault ships and instructor billets. 
8. Complaint. An allegation of harassment or prohibited discrimination submitted by a Service 
member. 
a. Informal Complaint. An allegation submitted orally or in writing to a member in a 
position of authority in the chain of command for resolution (i.e., the leading petty officer, chief 
petty officer, division officer, department head, etc.). 
b. Formal Complaint. An allegation that is submitted in writing via NA VPERS 5354/2; 
reference (i), article 1150; reference (f), article 138; communication to NAVINSGEN or elected 
officials; NA VPERS 1626/7; and any other communication the commander deems appropriate. 
c. Anonymous Complaint. An allegation received by the commander, regardless of the 
means of transmission, from an unknown or unidentified source, alleging harassment or 
prohibited discrimination. The individual is not required to divulge any personally identifiable 
information. 
9. Complainant. A Service member who submits an allegation of harassment or prohibited 
discrimination. 
10. Criminal Offense. An act or omission punishable under reference (f) or other Federal, State 
or local criminal law. 
B-2 
AppendixB 


[PAGE 54]
OPNA VINST 5354. IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
11. DEOMI. A DoD institution used to enhance combat and operational readiness by enhancing 
unit and organizational leadership and cohesion. This is accomplished by developing and 
conducting education and training in the administration of MEO, EEO and human relations. 
12. DEOCS. A commander's management tool that allows him or her to proactively assess 
critical organizational climate dimensions that can impact the organization's mission. This 
voluntary survey is designed to assess the "shared perceptions" of respondents about formal or 
informal policies or practices. The questionnaire focuses on the following primary areas: MEO, 
civilian EEO organizational effectiveness, perceptions of discrimination and sexual harassment 
and sexual assault prevention and response. 
13. Destructive Behaviors. Self-directed or prohibitive, abusive and hannful acts that are 
counterproductive to Sailor readiness and may cause harm to others. 
14. Determination. Decision made on a formal or anonymous harassment or prohibited 
discrimination complaint; substantiated or unsubstantiated. 
15. EO. The right of all persons to participate in and benefit from, programs and activities for 
which they are qualified. These programs and activities must be free from social, personal or 
institutional barriers that prevent people from rising to the highest level ofresponsibility 
possible. Persons will be evaluated on individual merit, fitness, capability and performance, 
regardless of race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), national origin or sexual 
orientation. 
16. Ethnicity. A group socially distinguished or set apart by others or itself, primarily on the 
basis of culture or nationality characteristics. Classifications of ethnicity include: Hispanic or 
Latino, defined as an individual of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American or 
other Spanish culture or origin, regardless ofrace; and not Hispanic or Latino. 
17. Executive Summary of a Command Climate Assessment. Formal correspondence 
summarizing a completed command climate assessment to include significant findings 
organizational strengths, areas of concern and recommended corrective actions. 
18. Extremist Group. An organization that espouses supremacist causes; attempts to create 
illegal discrimination based on race, creed, color, ethnicity, national origin, sex, sexual 
orientation or religion; advocates using force or violence; or otherwise engages in efforts to 
deprive individuals of their civil rights. 
19. Harassment or Prohibited Discrimination Formal Complaint Appeal Review. A level of 
review initiated when a member exercises his or her right to appeal the decision on a formal 
harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint. The initial review will be conducted by 
echelon 2 commander of the command where the complaint was investigated and adjudicated. 
B-3 
AppendixB 


[PAGE 55]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
20. Hostile Work Environment. An environment which prevents members from functioning to 
their full capacity, free of harassment and prohibited discrimination. A hostile work 
environment unreasonably interferes with an individual's work performance. It need not result 
in concrete psychological harm to the victim but need only be perceived by a reasonable person 
and is perceived by the victim, as hostile or offensive. Behavior does not need to occur in the 
physical workplace in order to create a hostile work environment. 
21. Informal Resolution System. A recommended technique for resolving informal harassment 
and prohibited discrimination complaints. 
22. Joint Service Environment. A locality from which operations of two or more of the military 
departments are projected or supported and which is manned by significant elements of two or 
more military departments or in which significant elements of two or more military departments 
are located. Includes joint commands, joint bases, defense agencies and joint field activities that 
involve more than one branch of military service. 
23. Legal Sufficiency Review. A written review of an investigation into a fonnal or anonymous 
complaint of harassment or prohibited discrimination by a judge advocate, prior to the 
commander's determination, to determine whether: 
a. The investigation complies with all applicable legal and administrative requirements. 
b. The investigation adequately addresses the complaint. 
c. The evidence supports the administrative findings concerning the complaint. 
Commanders will direct the investigating officer to obtain additional information if the finding is 
not supported. 
d. The investigation conclusions and recommendations are consistent with the findings. 
e. Any errors or irregularities exist and, if so, their legal effect, if any. 
f. 
The complainant and alleged offender were informed, in writing, of the results of the 
investigation, including whether the complaint was substantiated, unsubstantiated or dismissed. 
g. The complainant and alleged offender were advised of their right to appeal. 
24. MEO. The right of all Service members to serve and be evaluated based on only individual 
merit, fitness, capability and perfonnance in an environment free from harassment and prohibited 
discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), national origin or 
sexual orientation. 
B-4 
AppendixB 


[PAGE 56]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
25. MEO Program. The DoD-wide military program ofEO that is accomplished through efforts 
by the DoD Components. It provides an environment in which Service Members are ensured an 
opportunity to rise to the highest level of responsibility possible in the military profession, 
dependent only on merit, fitness and capability. 
26. National Origin. An individual's or ancestor's place of origin. Also applies to a person who 
has the physical, cultural or linguistic characteristics of a national group. 
27. National Origin Discrimination. Treating people unfavorably because they are from a 
particular country or part of the world, because of ethnicity or accent or because they appear to 
be ofa certain ethnic background (even if they are not). 
28. Protected Communication 
a. A communication protected under reference (h) and this instruction is: 
(I) A lawful communication by a Service member to a member of Congress or an IG or 
(2) A communication by a Service member to a member of Congress; the IG; a member 
of a DoD audit, inspection, investigation or law enforcement organization; any person or 
organization in the chain of command; a court-martial proceeding or any other person or 
organization pursuant to regulations or other established administrative proceedings to receive 
such communication, in which the Service member communicates information that he or she 
reasonably believes evidences of any of the situations in subparagraphs 28a(2)(a) through 
28a(2)(c). 
(a) Any violation oflaw or regulation, including a law or regulation prohibiting rape, 
sexual assault or other sexual misconduct in violation ofreference (f), sections 920, 902b, 920c 
or 930; harassment or prohibited discrimination. 
(b) Gross mismanagement, a gross waste of funds, an abuse of authority or a 
substantial and specific danger to public health or safety. 
(c) A threat by another Service member or employee of the Federal Government that 
indicates a determination or intent to kill or cause serious bodily injury to a Service member or 
civilian or damage to military, Federal or civilian property. 
(3) Providing testimony or otherwise participating or assisting in an investigation or 
proceeding related to a protected communication as defined in subparagraphs 28a(l) and 28a(2) 
or filing, causing to be filed, participating in or otherwise assisting in an action brought under 
references (h); (]), sections I 034, 1552 and 1552 and (n). 
B-5 
Appendix B 


[PAGE 57]
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
b. A protected communication will not be excluded from the protections provided in 
references (h); (I), sections 1034, 1552 and 1553; and (n) because: 
(I) The communication was made to a person who participated in an activity that the 
member reasonably believed to be covered by subparagraph 28a of this enclosure. 
(2) The communication revealed information that had previously been disclosed. 
(3) Of the member's motive for making the communication. 
( 4) The communication was not made in writing. 
(5) The communication was made while the member was off duty. 
( 6) The communication was made during the member's normal course of duties of the 
member. 
29. Race. A division ofhuman beings identified by the possession of traits that are transmissible 
by descent and that are sufficient to characterize persons possessing these traits as a distinctive 
human genotype. Classifications of race include American Indian or Alaskan Native, Asian, 
Black or African American, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander and White. 
30. Race Discrimination. Treating someone unfavorably because he or she is of a certain race or 
because of personal characteristics associated with race (such as hair texture, skin color or 
certain facial features). 
31. Reasonable Person Standard. An objective test used to detennine if behavior meets the legal 
test for harassment or prohibited discrimination. The test requires a hypothetical exposure of a 
reasonable person to the same set of facts and circumstances as reported in the complaint. The 
reasonable person standard considers the complainant's perspective and does not rely upon 
stereotyped notions of acceptable behavior within that particular work environment. 
32. Religion. A personal set or institutionalized system of attitudes, moral or ethical beliefs and 
practices that are held with the strength of traditional religious views, characterized by ardor and 
faith and generally evidenced through specific religious observances. 
33. Religious Discrimination. Treating a person unfavorably because of his or her religious 
beliefs and practices. 
34. Restrict (Restriction). Preventing or attempting to prevent a Service Member from making or 
preparing to make, a lawful communication to a member of Congress or an IG. 
B-6 
Appendix B 


[PAGE 58]
OPNAVINST 5354.!J 
5 Jun 2025 
35. Retaliation. Any illegal, impermissible or hostile actions taken by a Service Member's chain 
of command, peers or coworkers with the intent to retaliate against that person for reporting or 
planning to report a criminal offense or for making or planning to make a protected 
communication. Retaliatory behaviors are defined in subparagraphs 35a through 35c. 
a. Reprisal. The most severe form of retaliation. Taking or threatening to take an 
unfavorable personnel action or withholding or threatening to withhold a favorable personnel 
action for reporting or planning to report a criminal offense or for making or planning to make a 
protected communication. Reference(!), sections 1034, 1552 and 1553, also prohibits the 
following personnel actions: making or threatening to make a significant change in the duties or 
responsibilities of a Service member not commensurate with the member's grade; the failure of a 
superior to respond to any retaliatory action or harassment ( of which the superior had actual 
knowledge) taken by one or more subordinates; or conducting a retaliatory investigation of a 
Service member. 
b. Ostracism. The exclusion of a military member from social acceptance or membership in 
or association with a group of which such military member was a part or a reasonable person 
would conclude wanted to be a part, with the intent to inflict emotional distress on the military 
member, discourage reporting of a criminal offense or otherwise discourage the due 
administration of justice. Ostracism requires a nexus to military service. 
c. Maltreatment. Treatment by peers or by other persons, that, when viewed objectively 
under all the circumstances, is abusive or otherwise unwarranted, unjustified and unnecessary for 
any lawful purpose, that is done with intent to discourage reporting of a criminal offense or 
otherwise discourage the due administration of justice and that results in physical or mental hann 
or suffering or reasonably could have caused, physical or mental harm or suffering. 
Maltreatment under this instruction does not require a senior-subordinate relationship as is 
required for maltreatment under reference (g), article 93. 
36. Sex. The biological distinction between males and females. 
37. Sex Discrimination. Treating someone unfavorably because of the person's sex. 
Discrimination based on pregnancy is a form of sex discrimination. 
38. Sexual Assault. Intentional sexual contact characterized by use of force, threats, intimidation 
or abuse of authority or when the victim does not or cannot consent. The term includes a broad 
category of sexual offenses consisting of the following specific UCMJ offenses: rape, sexual 
assault, aggravated sexual contact, abusive sexual contact, forcible sodomy (forced oral or anal 
sex) or attempts to commit these acts. 
39. Sexual Orientation. Heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality, whether the orientation is 
real or perceived, including association with another individual of a particular sexual orientation. 
B-7 
AppendixB 


[PAGE 59]
OPNAVINST 5354.JJ 
5 Jun 2025 
40. Sexual Orientation Discrimination. Treating someone unfavorably because of the person's 
sexual orientation. 
41. Social Media. Web-based tools, websites, applications and media that connect users and 
allows them to engage in dialogue, share information, collaborate and interact. This includes 
using social media on-duty and off-duty through the use of government or personal devices in a 
manner that meets any of those definitions. 
42. Substantiated. A substantiated finding occurs when a preponderance of the evidence 
supports (more likely to have occurred than not occurred) the complainant's allegation of a 
violation oflaw, regulation or Navy policy or standards. The documented facts indicate that a 
violation occurred. 
43. Supervisor. Anyone who has subordinates, regardless ofpaygrades or ranks who is 
approached by a complainant, alleged offender or third party or who himself or herself observes 
harassment, prohibited discrimination or unacceptable behavior. 
44. Third Party. An individual who witnesses conduct constituting harassment or prohibited 
discrimination, but who is not a complainant as defined in this instruction. 
45. Witness. General term referring to an individual who has observed an instance of possible 
harassment or prohibited discrimination. This includes third parties and may include some 
complainants as defined in this instruction. 
46. Work Environment. The workplace or any other place that is work-connected, as well as the 
conditions or atmosphere under which people are required to work. Examples of work 
environment include, but are not limited to: an office; an entire office building; a Navy or DoD 
base or installation; DoD ships, aircraft or vehicles; anywhere when engaged in official Navy 
business; as well as command-sponsored social, recreational and sporting events, regardless of 
location. 
B-8 
Appendix B 


[PAGE 60]
APPENDIXC 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
CCS 
Command Climate Specialist 
CMEO 
Command Managed Equal Opportunity 
CMG 
Case Management Group 
CRT 
Command Resilience Team 
CMT 
Common Military Training 
DEOCS 
Defense Organizational Climate Survey 
DEOMI 
Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute 
DoD 
Department of Defense 
DON 
Department of the Navy 
DRC 
Deployed Resiliency Counselor 
EO 
Equal Opportunity 
EEO 
Equal Employment Opportunity 
FL TMPS Fleet Training Management and Planning System 
GCMCA General Courts-Martial Convening Authority 
IG 
MCIO 
MEO 
MFR 
Inspector General 
Immediate Superior in Command 
Military Criminal Investigative Organization 
Military Equal Opportunity 
Memorandum for the Record 
NAVINSGEN 
Naval Inspector General 
C-1 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
Appendix C 


[PAGE 61]
NA VOPSPTCEN 
Navy Operational Support Center 
NETC 
Naval Education and Training Command 
NJP 
Non-Judicial Punishment 
NRA 
Navy Reserve Activity 
NROTC 
Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps 
OJAG 
Office of the Judge Advocate General 
OPREP 
Operational Report 
POA&M Plan of Action and Milestones 
SAPR 
SARC 
SECNAV 
SELRES 
SES 
USNA 
VA 
VLC 
VTC 
XO 
Sexual Assault Prevention and Response 
Sexual Assault Response Coordinator 
Secretary of the Navy 
Selected Reserve 
Senior Executive Service 
United States Naval Academy 
Victim Advocate 
Victim's Legal Counsel 
Video Teleconference 
Executive Officer 
C-2 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
Appendix C 


[PAGE 62]
APPENDIXD 
DATA COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
1. Purpose. In an attempt to better understand the prevalence and subsequently eradicate 
harassment and prohibited discrimination from occurring in our Navy, this section of data 
collection applies to informal, formal and anonymous complaints. 
2. Data Collection. OPNA V NI 70C will collect and maintain data concerning harassment and 
prohibited discrimination complaints. This data will include information pertaining to informal, 
formal and anonymous complaints. Such data will be reported annually (and as needed) to the 
Director, Office of Civil Rights and Equal Opportunity Policy, through a DoD-approved 
automated data collection interface. Co1mnanders are required capture all data elements in 
subparagraphs 2a through 2p for harassment and prohibited discrimination as well as allegations 
of wrongful broadcast or distribution of intimate visual images. These must be provided to 
NI 70C via the echelon 2 CCS. 
a. The type of complaint (i.e., informal, formal or anonymous). 
b. The type of alleged behavior; prohibited discrimination, discriminatory harassment, 
harassment, hazing, bullying, sexual harassment, stalking or wrongful broadcast or distribution 
of intimate visual images. 
(1) If prohibited discrimination or discriminatory harassment provide the basis; race, 
color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), national origin, sexual orientation or a combination 
thereof. 
(2) If hazing or bullying provide whether the behavior was physical, psychological, 
written, verbal, non-verbal or a combination thereof. 
(3) If sexual harassment provide whether the behavior was crude or offensive behavior, 
unwanted sexual attention, sexual coercion or a combination thereof. 
c. The date the complaint was received by the commander and the date the commander 
reported receipt to the GCMCA. 
d. The DoD ID number, Service, component (active, reserve or civilian) grade, sex, 
ethnicity (Hispanic or non-Hispanic), race, age and religion of the complainant(s) and alleged 
offender(s). 
e. The UIC for the assigned command of the complainant(s) and alleged offender(s) at the 
time of the alleged incident(s). 
f. 
The location of the alleged incident(s). 
D-1 
AppendixD 


[PAGE 63]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
g. The duty status; on-duty, off-duty or both, of the complainant(s) and alleged offender(s) 
at the time of the aUeged incident( s ). 
h. The alleged offender's working relationship to the complainant at the time of the alleged 
incident( s ). 
i. 
A narrative description of the a1leged incident(s), to include if the use of social media or 
other electronic communications were involved. 
j. Whether the a1leged offender has prior substantiated harassment or prohibited 
discrimination complaints documented in his or her personnel file. 
k. The final determination of the complaint. Substantiated or unsubstantiated for formal and 
anonymous complaints and resolved or unresolved for infonnal complaints. 
I. 
The disposition of substantiated complaints, including no action, non-judicial 
punishment, discharge in lieu of court-martial or other adverse action, adverse administration 
action, court-martial. 
m. Paygrade and title of the investigating and adjudicating officers. 
n. The name, command name and contact information for the judge advocate that was 
consulted. 
o. Whether or not an a11egation of retaliation related to the harassment or prohibited 
discrimination complaint was submitted. 
p. The timeline of events from the date of complaint to final disposition and reason(s) for 
any delays. 
D-2 
AppendixD 


[PAGE 64]
APPENDIXE 
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
COMMAND MANAGED EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM MANAGER 
DESIGNATION LETTER 
From: Commanding Officer, (Name of Command) 
To: 
AMC You R. Sailor, USN 
5354 
SerN00/ 
DDMmYY 
Subj: DESIGNATION AS COMMAND MANAGED EQUAL OPPORTUNITY 
PROGRAM MANAGER 
Ref: 
(a) OPNAVINST 5354. IJ 
I. This letter designates that you have completed the Command Managed Equal Opportunity 
(CMEO) Manager course. Per reference (a), you are hereby designated as the (name of 
command) CMEO program manager. You are directed to contact the command climate 
specialist responsible for providing oversight and assistance to our command within 30 days of 
this letter. 
2. Our people continue to be the Navy's most precious resource. To ensure mission readiness, 
every member of the Department of the Navy must be afforded an equal opportunity to become a 
productive and valued member of the Navy team. Unprofessional behavior destroys trust and 
confidence among leaders and shipmates, erodes unit cohesion and combat readiness and is 
contrary to our core values of honor, courage and commitment. 
3. In the execution of these duties you will report directly to the commanding officer and 
provide program efficiency reviews as required to the chief of staff, executive officer, command 
master chief and any other designated personnel. 
J.M. COMMANDER 
E-1 
Appendix E 


[PAGE 65]
APPENDIXF 
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
COMMAND CLIMATE SPECIALIST CHECKLIST 
EO is an essential element of continual process improvement to enhance quality oflife. To 
ensure the basic systems are in place at the echelon 2 level and below, this checklist is provided 
as a tool to assist in the evaluation of the CCS in the execution of his or her responsibilities. 
1. Does the CCS inform the commander and CMEO program manager on all changes to the 
OPNA VIN ST 5354. IJ? 0 Yes O No O NI A 
2. Does the CCS provide analysis and recommendations to the commander regarding all 
informal, fonnal and anonymous harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints? 
□Yes □No □NIA 
3. Does the CCS conduct onsite or virtual assessments and inspections of immediate 
subordinate commands' CCSs and CMEO programs every 2 years? Is compliance reported to 
OPNAVN170C? □Yes □No □NIA 
4. Does the CCS provide CMEO program oversight, assist visits and training to the command 
and subordinate commands as requested or required? D Yes D No D NIA 
5. Does the CCS maintain items identified in subparagraphs 5a through 5f for subordinate 
commands: 
a. Command climate assessment supporting documentation, to include the executive 
summary and POA&M for the"last 3 years D Yes D No 
b. Results of the comprehensive visual inspections for the last 3 years. D Yes D No 
c. Results of the last three on-site or virtual assessments and inspections. D Yes D No 
d. Complaint log of all harassment, prohibited discrimination complaints and allegations of 
wrongful broadcast or distribution of intimate visual images for the last 3 years. 
□Yes □No □NIA 
e. Documentation of all administered MEO training outlined in chapter 7, for the last 3 
years. 0Yes 0No □NIA 
f. 
A copy of the NAVPERS 5354/2 documenting informal complaints of harassment and 
prohibited discrimination for the last 3 years. D Yes D No D NI A 
6. Does the CCS track and monitor the commands and subordinate commands command 
climate assessments? D Yes D No D NIA 
F-1 
AppendixF 


[PAGE 66]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
7. Does the CCS review the command climate assessment executive summary, POA&M and 
DEOCS and provide a report to the ISIC prior to a commander's face-to-face debrief? 
□Yes □No □NIA 
8. Does the CCS provide assistance, advice and training regarding conflict resolution and 
grievance and redress procedures? D Yes D No D NIA 
9. Does the CCS serve as the central point of contact for all MEO and command climate issues 
and provide guidance and training to CMEO program managers regarding the processing of 
harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints? D Yes D No D NI A 
I 0. Does the CCS use chapters 4 and 5 of OPNA VIN ST 5354. lJ for the processing of infonnal, 
formal and anonymous complaints, respectively? D Yes D No D NIA 
11. Does the CCS use chapter 6 of OPNA VINST 5354.1 J for the appropriate procedures when 
approached by a Service Member who alleges retaliation related to a harassment or prohibited 
discrimination complaint? D Yes D No D NIA 
12. Does the CCS track and monitor the reporting and status of their command and subordinate 
commands' harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints? Are all data elements 
outlined in appendix D ofOPNAVINST 5354.IJ are collected and forwarded to OPNAV 
Nl70C? □Yes □No □NIA 
13. Does the CCS track allegations of wrongful broadcast or distribution of intimate visual 
images? Are all data elements outlined in appendix D of OPNA VINST 5354. 1J are collected 
andforwardedtoOPNAVN170C? □Yes □No □NIA 
14. Does the CCS provide the commander a quarterly verbal brief and written report of the status 
of subordinate command's harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints? 
□Yes □No □NIA 
15. Does the CCS provide semi-annual MEO training to subordinate command CCSs and CMEO 
program managers? 
□Yes □No □NIA 
16. Does the CCS maintain a current point of contact listing of subordinate command CCSs and 
CMEO program managers? D Yes D No D NI A 
F-2 
Appendix F 


[PAGE 67]
APPENDIXG 
OPNA VINST 5354. IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
COMMAND MANAGED EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM CHECKLIST 
MEO is an essential element of continual process improvement to enhance quality oflife. To 
ensure the basic systems are in place at the unit to promote a positive command climate, this 
checklist is provided as a tool to assist in the evaluation of the CMEO program. 
1. Did the commander, along with the deputy, XO or assistant officer in charge and senior 
enlisted leader, obtain a one-on-one MEO and command climate brief from their CRT within 60 
days of the commander assuming command? D Yes D No 
2. Does the commander promote a positive command climate? D Yes D No 
3. Did the commander establish CCS billets at the echelon 2 and echelon 3 commands with 
subordinate commands? D Yes D No D NIA 
4. Did the commander assign a CMEO program manager? Did that assignment meet the 
requirements outlined in OPNA VINST 5354. IJ? D Yes D No 
5. Did the commander develop, disseminate and enforce harassment prevention and MEO 
policy statements which include expectations regarding procedural compliance? D Yes D No 
6. Did the commander ensure comprehensive visual inspections throughout the command are 
conducted on a regular basis, not less than annually? D Yes D No 
7. Does the commander monitor their command and subordinate command's command 
climates? D Yes D No 
8. Does the commander ensure assessments and inspections of subordinate commands' MEO 
programs were being conducted every 2 years? D Yes D No D NIA 
9. Did the commander establish a CRT? D Yes D No 
10. Did the commander complete and ensure subordinate commanders completed, a command 
climate assessment in line with OPNA VIN ST 5354. IJ? D Yes D No 
11. Does the commander ensure command demographics for collateral duty assigmnents, 
retention, discipline, advancement and awards are reviewed quarterly? D Yes D No 
12. Did the commander ensure the Equal Opportunity Infonnation Poster was prominently 
displayed and included the name and telephone numbers of the command's point of contact? 
OYes ONo 
G-1 
Appendix G 


[PAGE 68]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
13. Did the commander ensure all individuals are familiar with their right to submit an informal, 
formal or anonymous complaint and a report of retaliation and the methods for submission? 
0Yes 0No 
14. Did the commander promote the chain of command as the primary and preferred channel to 
identify, process and resolve complaints of harassment and prohibited discrimination? 
0Yes 0No 
15. Did the commander use chapters 4 and 5 ofOPNAVINST 5354.IJ for the processing of 
informal, formal and anonymous complaints and chapter 6 of OPNA VINST 5354. 1J for 
retaliation response procedures? D Yes D No D NI A 
16. Did the commander consult a CCS to provide analysis and recommendations regarding all 
informal, formal and anonymous harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints as well as 
any other issues that affect the command climate of a unit? D Yes D No D NI A 
17. Did the commander track and monitor the reporting and status of their command and 
subordinate command's harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints? 
□Yes 0No □NIA 
18. Does the commander ensure substantiated harassment or prohibited discrimination 
complaints are annotated on the offender's performance evaluation or service record? 
□Yes 0No □NIA 
19. Does the commander ensure harassment and prohibited discrimination are absent in all 
administrative and disciplinary proceedings? D Yes D No 
20. Does the commander ensure personnel receive awards and recognition and are assigned jobs, 
education opportunities and special programs based on merit, fitness, capability and 
performance? D Yes D No 
21. Did the CMEO program manager contact their respective CCS within 30 days of being 
designated as the CMEO program manager? D Yes D No 
22. Did the CMEO program manager assess the CMEO program upon designation as CMEO 
program manager and annually thereafter? D Yes D No 
23. Does the command continuity folder contain the information listed in subparagraphs 23a 
through 23f: 
a. The command climate assessment supporting documentation, to include the executive 
summary and POA&M for the last 3 years. D Yes D No 
G-2 
Appendix G 


[PAGE 69]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
b. Results of the comprehensive visual inspections for the last 3 years. D Yes D No 
c. Results of the last three on-site assessments and inspections. D Yes D No 
d. Complaint log of all harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints and allegations 
of wrongful broadcast or distribution of intimate visual images for the last 3 years. 
□Yes 0No □NIA 
e. Documentation of all administered MEO training for the last 3 years. D Yes D No 
f. 
Copies of the NA VPERS 535412 documenting infonnal harassment and prohibited 
discrimination complaints for the last 3 years. D Yes D No D NIA 
24. Does the CMEO program manager track, monitor, report and provide status updates on 
harassment and prohibited discrimination complaints to the respective CCS from submission 
through resolution of the complaint? Were the data elements outlined in appendix D of 
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ to OPNAV NI 70C? 
□Yes 0No □NIA 
25. Does the CMEO program manager coordinate and monitor MEO training when directed by 
the commander? D Yes D No 
26. Does the CMEO program manager attend semi-annual MEO sustaimnent training provided 
by the servicing CCS or a CCS in the geographic region? D Yes D No 
G-3 
Appendix G 


[PAGE 70]
APPENDIXH 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
COMMAND CLIMATE ASSESSMENT PROCESS 
1. Command Climate Assessment. To determine the overall health and effectiveness of an 
organization, the command climate assessment provides an opportunity for Service members and 
civilian employees to express opinions regarding the manner and extent to which leaders, 
including commanders and supervisors, respond to allegations of problematic behaviors, 
including sexual assault, sexual harassment, harassment and prohibited discrimination. 
Note: Contractors and local foreign nationals are considered members of the public. 
Commanders must not collect infonnation from the public without first obtaining 
approval from the Office of Management and budget and may not seek to enforce or 
request compliance with disapproved or expired collections of infonnation. 
a. Both active and reserve commanders, commanding officers, officers in charge and 
directors (hereafter referred to as commanders) will complete a command climate assessment 
within 120 days after assumption of command and annually as follow-up assessments during 
their command tenure. 
Note: Navy reserve units not listed on the Standard Navy Distribution List will be 
included in the supported command's command climate assessment. Voluntary training 
units and operational support units will be included in the NA VOPSPTCEN command 
climate assessment. 
b. Each unit, with a commander, commanding officer, officer-in-charge billet or civilian 
equivalent, regardless of size, is required to complete a command climate assessment. 
c. Units with fewer than 50 survey participants must be surveyed with a larger unit in the 
command to ensure anonymity and to provide the opportunity for all military personnel to 
participate in the climate assessment process. Commanders of these units are still required to 
complete a command climate assessment by conducting nnit level focus groups, interviews, 
observations and reviewing command records and reports. 
d. The command climate assessment must be completed using the DEOCS, focus groups, 
interviews, observations and reviewing command records and reports. The command climate 
assessment must not take longer than 60 days, 110 days for NRA, from the start of the DEOCS 
to the commander's debrief of the command. An example of a command climate assessment 
timeline is outlined in subparagraphs ld(l) through ld(6). 
(1) DEOCS: 21 days, one drill cycle for NRAs. 
(2) Request and receive report: 7 days. 
H-1 
Appendix H 


[PAGE 71]
(3) CRT review of the report: 10 days, 25 days forNRAs. 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
( 4) Conduct focus groups and interviews: 10 days, 30 days for NRAs. 
(5) Preparation of the executive summary and POA&M: 7 days, 10 days forNRAs. 
( 6) Commanders must debrief their commands no later than 5 days after receipt of the 
executive summary from the CRT. 
e. Records and reports must be maintained and reviewed quarterly. 
f. 
The CCSs and CMEO program managers in the absence of a CCS will track and provide 
oversight of the command climate assessment process for subordinate commands. 
g. The !SIC must include a statement in the commander's performance evaluation or annual 
fitness report annotating if the commander has conducted the required command climate 
assessment. Failure of a commander to conduct the required command climate assessment must 
be noted in the commander's performance evaluation or annual fitness report. 
2. Enhanced Commander Accountability 
a. Commanders must conduct a face-to-face debrief of their command climate assessment 
executive summary using the DEOCS to include a POA&M, with their !SIC. Debriefs may 
occur virtually for commanders not located in the same geographic region as their !SIC. 
Commanders must provide their !SIC with a face-to-face debrief at the first opportunity either in 
person or virtually. This process will provide the !SIC an opportunity to mentor the commander 
and will happen within 60 days of completion of the command climate assessment, unless 
otherwise approved by the echelon 2 commander. The POA&M and executive summary must 
be forwarded to the !SIC no later than 30 days after completion of the command climate 
assessment. 
b. Commanders must include the !SIC commander contact information in their initial 
DEOCS request to enable automatic !SIC visibility of the command climate survey process. 
Commanders must also validate the !SIC contact information when closing the DEOCS and 
requesting the DEOCS report to enable the !SIC to receive automatic notification and directly 
access the DEOCS results and report. 
c. The Chief of Naval Operations has directed that echelon 2 commanders list the Vice 
Chief of Naval Operations (VCNO) as their !SIC. The VCNO is authorized to further delegate 
this to any of the Deputy Chiefs of Na val Operations or Director, Navy Staff as appropriate. 
d. ISi Cs at each level must issue guidance to their respective commanders on scheduling the 
face-to-face debriefs and provide the !SIC contact infonnation for ordering the DEOCS. 
H-2 
Appendix H 


[PAGE 72]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
e. Debriefs must cover significant findings, areas of strength, areas of concern, an 
explanation of the validation process, actions taken and plans developed to improve command 
climate. Brief format will be determined by the echelon 2 commander. 
H-3 
AppendixH 


[PAGE 73]
APPENDIX I 
OPNA VINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ANNUAL CLIMATE ASSESSMENT 
From: Commander, (Name of Command) 
To: 
(Immediate Superior in Command) 
5354 
SerN00/ 
Subj: FYXX (NAME OF COMMAND) EQUAL OPPORTUNITY CLIMATE 
ASSESSMENT 
Ref: 
(a) OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
Encl: (1) List all enclosures, if any 
1. Background. Per reference (a), (Command Name) is providing an annual equal opportunity 
climate assessment based on input from echelon 3 and subordinate commands. 
2. Assessment Methodology. Data used in compiling this report was extracted from 
subordinate command's command climate assessment executive summaries, the harassment and 
prohibited discrimination complaint log command climate specialist and command managed 
equal opportunity program assessments and inspector general inspections. 
3. Significant findings (consistent feedback, positive or negative, list all). 
a. 
b. 
4. Organizational Strengths. 
a. 
b. 
5. Areas of Concern. 
a. 
b. 
I-1 
Appendix I 


[PAGE 74]
6. Recommended Corrective Actions (address areas of concern). 
a. 
b. 
7. Conclusion and Summary. 
I. M. COMMANDER 
I-2 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
Appendix I 


[PAGE 75]
APPENDIXJ 
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY RESOURCES 
OPNAVINST 5354. lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
1. Navy EO website: https://www.mynavyhr.navy.mil/Support-Services/Culture-Resilience/Equal-
Opportunity/. 
2. Address: 
Harassment Prevention and Military Equal Opportunity Office 
5720 Integrity Drive 
Building 457 Room 202 
Millington, TN 38055 
3. DoD Issuances: https://www.esd.whs.mil/Directives/issuances/dodi/. 
4. DON Issuances: https://www.secnav.navy.mil/doni/default.aspx. 
5. Survey Tools 
a. DEOCS. This survey is available to commanders from the Office of People Analytics 
and may be obtained through their website at 
https://surveysdrc.corn/deocs portal/(S(bp4eunm41 so5vv3tmnx0hh4p))/EnterEmail.aspx. 
b. Command Resilience Team Guide 
6. Equal Opportunity Information Poster. NAVPERS 15600E, SIN 0500-LP-117-6471 , 
available through the Navy Logistics Library. 
7. The Navy Harassment Prevention and MEO Advice Line. Provides information on how and 
where to file complaints and what kinds of behaviors constitute harassment and prohibited 
discrimination. This is also an avenue to file anonymous harassment and prohibited 
discrimination complaints. The line is anonymous, toll-free and may be used by members of the 
DON. Toll free telephone number is (800) 253-0931 and the commercial number is (901) 874-
2507, Defense Switched Network (DSN): 882. The advice line can also be reached by e-mail: 
Mill Navy EO Advice@us.navy.mil. DON civilians are advised to consult the appropriate 
servicing EEO office 
8. DEOMI website. Provides support materials designed to assist with sexual harassment 
prevention training, EO related publications, guidance and various website links. The DEOMI 
website can be accessed at https://www.defenseculture.mil. 
9. List of Applicable and Helpful References 
a. DoD Instruction 1300.17, Religious Liberty in the Military Services of 1 September 2020 
J-1 
Appendix J 


[PAGE 76]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
b. SECNAVINST 1730.8B, Accommodation of Religious Practices. 
c. SECNAV M-5200.35O, Deparhnent of the Navy Managers' Internal Control Manual, 29 
Mar 2019. 
d. SECNAV M-5210.2, Department of the Navy Standard Subject Identification Code 
(SSIC) Manual, 29 August 2018. 
e. SECNA VINST 5350. l 5D, Department of the Navy Core Values Charter and Ethics 
Training, 18 April 2018. 
f. 
OPNAVINST 3120.32D, Standard Organization and Regulations of the U.S. Navy, 15 
May 2017. 
g. Command Resilience Team Guide 
h. 62 FR 58782, Office of Management and Budget, Revisions to the Standards for the 
Classification of Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity. 
J-2 
Appendix J 


[PAGE 77]
APPENDIXK 
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
COMMAND RESILIENCE TEAM NON-DISCLOSURE AGREEMENT 
1. I understand that by serving on the (cmmnand name) Command Resilience Team (CRT) I am 
expected to participate in the analysis of the DEOCS, focus groups, interviews, observations and 
the review of command records and reports in support of the command climate assessment and 
that I will incur certain obligations enumerated in paragraphs 2 through 6. 
2. I understand that in the execution of my CRT duties I am a confidential agent of ( command 
name) for obtaining uninhibited self-analysis and self-criticism of the internal management, 
operation and administration of the command. 
3. The purpose ofmy participation is to assist in clarifying and validating infonnation brought 
forward during the command climate assessment. Reports of the (command name) are internal 
memoranda and constitute privileged infonnation which is for official use only and is not 
releasable outside this command without the specific approval of the commander, (command 
name). 
4. I understand that the direct or indirect unauthorized disclosure, unauthorized retention or 
negligent handling of information obtained in the course of my duties with the ( command name) 
CRT, including either oral or written information, could cause injury to naval operations or naval 
personnel and may subject me to disciplinary action or other legal process. 
5. I agree that I will not divulge any information gained from my involvement with the 
(command name) CRT outside this command unless I have the specific written approval from 
the commander, commanding officer, officer in charge or director. 
Note: Service members must be free to make a protected communication in line with 
Military Whistleblower Protection, SECNA VINST 53 70. 7E. 
6. Unless and until I am released in writing by an authorized representative of the United States 
government, I understand that all conditions and obligations imposed upon me apply during all 
times I am assigned to the ( command name) and at all times thereafter without limitation. 
Service Member, Date 
CRT Lead, Date 
K-1 
Appendix K 


[PAGE 78]
APPENDIXL 
INFORMAL RESOLUTION SYSTEM 
OPNA VINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
1. Background. The informal resolution system was developed to facilitate resolution of 
interpersonal conflicts at the lowest appropriate level. Conflict can be defined as a disagreement 
between two or more people that raises serious concerns and needs to be resolved. 
Note: Commanders, commanding officers, officers in charge and civilian equivalents 
(hereafter referred to as commanders) must be infonned immediately, within 24 hours, of 
any formal harassment or prohibited discrimination complaint in their command 
2. Infonnal Resolution System Concept and Goals 
a. The infonnal resolution system provides the necessary information and skills to 
encourage and facilitate resolving interpersonal conflicts in the workplace at the lowest 
appropriate level. 
b. Emphasizes the Navy core values of honor, courage and commitment. 
c. Emphasizes each person's responsibility to be a role model of acceptable behavior and 
confront unacceptable behavior when observed or brought to his or her attention. 
3. Infonnal Resolution System Options 
(1) In person by approaching the alleged offender(s) involved. Stay focused on the 
behavior and its impact. Use common courtesy and ensure the approach is not disrespectful. 
Consider writing down thoughts prior to approaching the alleged offender(s) involved. 
(2) In writing, to the alleged offender(s) stating the facts and feelings about the behavior 
and the expected resolution. 
b. Infonnal Third Party. Request assistance from another person. Ask another person to 
talk with alleged offender(s) involved, to accompany while using the direct approach or to 
intervene to help resolve the conflict. 
c. Training 
(]) Request training or resource materials for presentation to the workplace in the area of 
harassment or prohibited discrimination. Using training is a good method of communicating to 
the alleged offender(s) and other individuals in the workplace, in a non-threatening way that the 
behavior is unacceptable. 
L-1 
Appendix L 


[PAGE 79]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(2) Training resources can include videos, books, lesson plans, posters and other 
materials. 
4. Responsibilities 
a. Complainant 
(1) Evaluate. What exactly happened? What was the impact of the behavior? Did it 
disrupt your work performance or work environment? What are the responsibilities and options? 
(2) Take Action 
(a) If the behavior is unacceptable, infonn the chain of command of actions taken or 
needed. Determine whether taking formal action is appropriate or whether the informal 
resolution system can resolve the concern. 
(b) If the behavior is acceptable, no action is required. 
b. Alleged Offender 
(1) Evaluate. What exactly happened? What was the impact of the behavior? Did it 
disrupt the work environment? Would it have offended a reasonable person? Was the behavior 
acceptable or unacceptable? What are the responsibilities and options? 
(2) Take Action 
(a) If the behavior is or seems unacceptable, stop immediately. 
(b) If the behavior seems acceptable, clarify with another person or a supervisor that 
the behavior is acceptable. Ask a co-worker or supervisor for assistance in approaching the 
complainant or to intervene. Talk with the complainant about ways to communicate more 
effectively. 
c. Third Party 
(1) Evaluate. What exactly happened? What was the impact of the behavior? Did it 
disrupt the work environment? Would it have offended a reasonable person? Was the behavior 
acceptable or unacceptable? What are the responsibilities and options? If unsure how to proceed 
seek advice. 
(2) Take Action (when approached by a complainant). 
L-2 
Appendix L 


[PAGE 80]
OPNA VINST 5354. IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(a) If the behavior is unacceptable, encourage the complainant to detennine whether 
taking fonnal action is appropriate or whether the informal resolution system can resolve the 
problem. Inform the chain of command and refer all parties to support services. 
(b) If the behavior is acceptable, advise the complainant that the behavior is 
acceptable and explain why. 
(3) Take Action (when approached by an alleged offender). 
(a) If the behavior is unacceptable, advise the alleged offender to stop the behavior. 
Inform the chain of command and refer all parties to support services. 
(b) After confinning with a supervisor that the behavior is acceptable, advise the 
alleged offender that the behavior is acceptable and explain why. Encourage the alleged 
offender to talk with the complainant and discuss the situation. 
(4) Take Action (when observing harassing or offending behavior). 
(a) Stop it if possible and infonn the chain of command if appropriate. Encourage 
the complainant to use the formal complaint system if the informal resolution system cannot 
resolve the concern. Refer all parties to appropriate support services. 
(b) If the behavior is acceptable, no action is required. 
d. Supervisor 
(1) Evaluate. What exactly happened? What was the impact of the behavior? Did it 
disrupt the work environment? Would it have offended a reasonable person? Was the behavior 
acceptable or unacceptable? What are the responsibilities and options? 
(2) Take Action (when approached by a complainant). 
(a) If the behavior is unacceptable, take corrective action. Encourage the 
complainant to determine whether the infonnal resolution system can resolve the problem or to 
use the formal complaint process. Inform the chain of command and refer all parties to support 
services. 
(b) If the behavior is acceptable, advise the complainant that the behavior is 
acceptable and explain why. 
(3) Take Action (when approached by an alleged offender). 
L-3 
AppendixL 


[PAGE 81]
OPNAVINST 5354.IJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(a) If the behavior is unacceptable, advise the alleged offender to stop the behavior 
and advise that corrective action may result. Detennine whether the informal resolution system 
can resolve the concern. Inform the chain of command and refer all parties to support services. 
(b) If the behavior is acceptable, advise the alleged offender it was acceptable and 
explain why. 
(4) Take Action (when approached by a third party). 
(a) If the behavior is unacceptable, instruct the observer on the need for awareness. 
Take corrective action and notify the chain of command. Discuss the infonnal resolution system 
and formal complaint process to detennine the best course of action for the complainant. 
(b) If the behavior is acceptable, no action is required. 
(5) Take Action (when observing harassing or offending behavior). 
(a) If the behavior is unacceptable, stop the behavior and take corrective action. 
Notify the chain of command and advise the complainant of the informal resolution system and 
formal complaint options. 
(b) If the behavior is acceptable, no action is required. 
5. Commander's Responsibilities under the Infonnal Resolution System 
a. Set the example. 
b. Establish a command climate that allows and encourages individuals to resolve conflicts 
between themselves without fear ofretaliation. 
c. Keep an open mind. Listen and do not filter. 
d. Do not ignore the behavior. 
e. Know when to get involved and when not to. If the informal resolution system is 
working, give it a chance to resolve the conflict. 
(1) Determine if the infonnal resolution system has been used, if not, encourage its use if 
appropriate. 
(2) Do not intervene when conflict is being appropriately resolved by those involved. 
(3) Intervene when necessary. Get involved when: 
L-4 
Appendix L 


[PAGE 82]
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
(a) Unacceptable behavior is observed and 
(b) Made aware of a situation that cannot be resolved. 
( 4) Take or support actions to reach resolutions. Provide resource materials as 
appropriate. 
(5) In all cases, follow-up and provide feedback to the individuals involved. 
(6) Report and take action on all collateral misconduct that is discovered in addition to 
harassment or prohibited discrimination and inform the appropriate authorities. 
(7) Avoid further traumatizing the complainant, e.g., if you need to physically separate 
personnel, whenever feasible move the alleged offender, not the complainant. 
(8) Make referrals to support services as warranted. 
L-5 
Appendix L 


[PAGE 83]
APPENDIXM 
OPNAVINST 5354.lJ 
5 Jun 2025 
HARASSMENT OR PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATION COMPLAINT RETALITIATION 
AWARENESS 
1. This retaliation awareness document is for a harassment or prohibited discrimination 
complaint. The chain of command of the complainant, the chain of command of the alleged 
offender, the complainant, the alleged offender and any witnesses must be made aware of this 
retaliation awareness document. 
2. All Service members and Department of the Navy personnel who make a protected 
communication must be free from retaliation as defined in appendix B of OPNA VINST 5354. lJ. 
The CCS or CMEO program manager must ensure Service members understand the types of 
retaliatory defined in OPNA VINST 5354. lJ. 
3. The chain of command of the complainant and the chain of command of the alleged offender 
will not: 
a. Initiate any contact with the complainant, any witness or potential witness or the alleged 
offender in this investigation outside of that required by their official duties; and 
b. Solicit others to act on their behalf to contact the complainant, any witness or potential 
witness or the alleged offender in this investigation outside of that required by their official 
duties. 
4. The complainant should notify the Naval Inspector General, (800) 522-3451, immediately if, 
during the course of this investigation he or she believes they are suffering a reprisal as a result 
of this complaint. The complainant should notify his or her supervisor, command climate 
specialist, command managed equal opportunity program manager or commander, commanding 
officer, officer in charge or civilian equivalent immediately if, during the course of this 
investigation, he or she believes they are suffering a form of retaliation other than reprisal as a 
result of this complaint. 
Complainant, Date 
Alleged Offender, Date 
M-1 
Appendix M 
